---
title: "Railway Terminology Collection"
sourceName: "Official site of ERA (European Union Agency for Railways)"
sourceUrl: "https://www.era.europa.eu/era-railway-terminology-collection"
regions:
  - "EU"
lastUpdated: "2025-07-06"
collectedBy: "A. Piatrou"
---

1Bg — Unilateral configuration with one friction element per friction element holder
1Bgu — Unilateral configuration with two friction elements per friction element holder
1D — Single-dimensional approach to risk estimation
1D barcode — One-dimensional barcode principally to encode the stock control number as defined in TD B.6.
1D barcode — One-dimensional barcode, a possible type of certificate for home printed tickets
1D+ — Extended single-dimensional approach to risk estimation
2Bg — Bilateral configuration with one friction element per fiction element holder
2Bgu — Bilateral configuration with two friction elements per friction element holder
2D — Two-dimensional approach to risk estimation
2D barcode — Two-dimensional barcode, a possible type of certificate for home printed tickets
3D — Three-dimensional approach to risk estimation
4th RP — 4th Railway Package
5G corridor — A transport path, road, railway or inland waterway, fully covered with digital connectivity infrastructure and in particular 5G systems, enabling the uninterrupted provision of synergy digital services such as connected and automated mobility, similar smart mobility services for railways or digital connectivity on inland waterways.
5G systems — A set of digital infrastructure elements based on globally agreed standards for mobile and wireless communications technology used for connectivity and added-value services with advanced performance characteristics such as very high data rates and capacity, low latency communications, ultra-high reliability or support for a high number of connected devices.
8D — Eight disciplines (of problem solving)
A-weighted equivalent continuous sound pressure level  LpAeq,T — See ISO Standard formula where LpAeq,T	is the A-weighted equivalent continuous sound pressure level in dB; T	is the measurement time interval in s; pA(t)	is the A-weighted instantaneous sound pressure at running time t in Pa; p0	is the reference sound pressure; p0 = 20 μPa. Note 1 to entry: Adapted from ISO 1996‑1:2003.
A4 — A paper size of 210 x 297 mm defined by international standard ISO 216
AADT — Average annual daily traffic
AB — See Allocation body
AB — Accreditation Body
ABAC (Accrual Based Accounting) — The Commission’s accounting system, which since 2005 has been enriched by accrual accounting rules. Apart from the cash-based budget accounts, the Commission produces accrual-based accounts.
ABT — Assistance Booking Tool
AC — Alternating Current
AC — Alternating current
AC — Alternative current
ACB — Accredited Certification Body
Acceleration allowed near level crossing — Existence of  limit for acceleration of train if  stopping  or  recovering  speed  close  to a level crossing expressed in a specific re ference acceleration curve.
Acceptable means of compliance — Non-binding opinions issued by the Agency to define ways of establishing compliance with the essential requirements.
Acceptable national means of compliance — Non-binding opinions issued by Member States to define ways of establishing compliance with national rules.
Acceptance phase — The timetabling phase following the final offer, where the applicant(s) have to express their position towards the offer. Usually, the answer can be only “accept” or “reject”, in the path alteration and path modification and ad hoc processes also “ask for adaptation” is allowed under certain conditions. If there is no answer from the Applicant the process ends (no Allocation).
Accepted other pantograph heads — Indication of pantograph heads which are allowed to be used
Accepted TSI compliant panto graph heads — Indication  of  TSI  compliant  pantograph heads which are allowed to be used.
Access — Parameter without explanation in the document
Access party — Either a licensed railway undertaking or, to the extent authorised by each Member State, another party seeking to procure a train path in the working timetable for the operation of railway service on its territory with commercial or public-service intent. Examples of such authorised parties may be public authorities, or any other party having an access contract or an international group of such parties, which is also known as an applicant group or access party group
Access step — The first step of a vehicle that a passenger uses when boarding or alighting a train. This will normally be the step that is closest to the platform edge. It may be a fixed or a moveable step.
Access to driver's cab — Parameter without explanation in the document
Access to reference data — Every stakeholder in the RU/IM message exchange needs to register for the message exchange (see 23.3 on allocation of certificates) through the governance admin service. Following certification, the stakeholder has access to all location codes stored in the Central Repository Domain. The reference data can be used for all TAP and TAF purposes and related processes. To perform these processes, stakeholders may give the data to suppliers under the precondition that the stakeholder ensures the data is solely used for these purposes and is not used for other commercial activities. Access to all reference data will be provided through the use of a reference data service managed by the governance entity. This service will meet the requirements described in this Implementation Guide or as subsequently decided by the governance entity. Access requirements are not subject to approval by the TAP-CCM or TAF-CCM.
Access, egress and doors — Requirements concerning accessibility to the driver's cab and engine room (also external walkways on hood units). Requirements concerning exterior and interior doors, hood access doors, door clearance, footsteps, handrails or opening handles, door locking, prevention from access by non-authorised persons.
Accessibility of data — The possibility to request and obtain data at any time in a machine readable format.
Accident — As defined in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
Accident — An unwanted or unintended sudden event or a specific chain of such events which have harmful consequences; accidents are divided into the following categories: collisions; derailments; level crossing accidents; accidents to persons involving rolling stock in motion; fires and others.
Accident — An unwanted or unintended sudden event or a specific chain of such events (occurring during train operation) which has harmful consequences.
Accident — An unwanted or unintended sudden event or a specific chain of such events that have harmful consequences.
Accident — An unwanted or unintended sudden event or a specific chain of such events which have harmful consequences; accidents are divided into the following categories: collisions, derailments, level-crossing accidents, accidents to persons involving rolling stock in motion, fires and others.
Accident insurance — Voluntary or mandated insurance against the risks of accidents (property and health). The premiums partly internalise external costs.
Accident involving the transport of dangerous goods — Any accident or incident that is subject to reporting in accordance with RID (1)/ADR section 1.8.5.
Accident involving the transport of dangerous goods — Any accident or incident that is subject to reporting in accordance with the Regulation concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail.
Accident to persons involving rolling stock in motion — Accidents to one or more persons who are either hit by a railway vehicle or by an object attached to, or that has become detached from, the vehicle, this includes persons who fall from railway vehicles as well as persons who fall or are hit by loose objects when travelling on board vehicles.
Accidents to persons caused by rolling stock in motion — Accidents to one or more persons that are either hit by a railway vehicle or part of it or hit by an object attached to or that has become detached from the vehicle. Persons that fall from railway vehicles are included, as well as persons that fall or are hit by loose objects when travelling on-board vehicles.
Accommodation — A type of physical location that can be booked on a train (a seat, a couchette, a berth, a space for bicycle, etc.)
Accompanied combined transport — Transport of a complete road vehicle, accompanied by the driver, using another mode of transport (for example ferry or train).
Accountable — To be answerable for actions, decisions and performance.
Accounting — The act of recording and reporting financial transactions.
Accounting system — An IT system managed by the attributor (or a company acting on behalf of it), used to correctly apportion the sales revenue, crediting the carriers involved in the sold transport services, and debiting the issuer deducting the issuer’s Commission according to the commercial agreements
Accreditation — Accreditation as defined in Article 2(10) of Regulation (EC) 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Accreditation — As defined in Article 2(10) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Accreditation — Accreditation as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Accreditation — The meaning assigned to it by Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Accreditation — Accreditation as defined in point (10) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Accreditation — Accreditation as defined in point 10 of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Accreditation — An attestation by a national accreditation body that a conformity assessment body meets the requirements set by harmonised standards and, where applicable, any additional requirements including those set out in relevant sectoral schemes, to carry out a specific conformity assessment activity.
Accreditation — Accreditation as defined in Article 2(10) of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Accreditation — An attestation by a national accreditation body that a conformity assessment body meets the requirements set by European harmonised standards or applicable international standards and, where applicable, any additional requirements, including those set out in relevant sectoral schemes, to carry out a specific conformity assessment activity.
Accreditation body — The sole body in a Contracting State that performs accreditation with authority derived from the State.
Accurate  geographical  description — Well  Known  Text  line  string  representing  the  geographical shape  of  the  track
ACE — Action for cooperation in the field of economics
ACER — European Union Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators
ACID — Stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, Durability These are the four primary attributes common to any transaction: Atomicity. In a transaction involving two or more discrete pieces of information, either all of the pieces are committed or none are Consistency. A transaction either creates a new and valid state of data or, if any failure occurs, returns all data to the state before the transaction was started Isolation. A transaction in process and not yet committed must remain isolated from any other transaction Durability. Committed data are saved by the system so that, even in the event of a failure and system restart, the data are available in their correct state The ACID concept is described in ISO/IEC 10026-1:1992 Section 4. Each of these attributes can be measured against a benchmark. In general, however, a transaction manager or monitor is designated to implement the ACID concept. In a distributed system, one way to achieve ACID is to use a two-phase commit (2PC), which ensures either that all involved sites must commit to completing the transaction or that none do, and the transaction is rolled back
ACK — Acknowledgement
Acknowledgement — Confirmation given by the driver to a request from the ETCS on-board that he/she has received information he/she needs to take into account.
Acknowledgement — Confirmation by an entity that it has received information
Acknowledgement — Confirmation given by the driver to a request from the ETCS on-board that he has received information he needs to take into account.
Acknowledgement, driver — Confirmation by the driver that he/she has taken into account information received through the DMI
Acoustic rail roughness r(x) — Variation of the height of the rail running surface associated with rolling noise excitation, expressed as a function of distance x along the rail. Note 1 to entry: Acoustic rail roughness is expressed in µm.
Acoustic roughness r(x) — Variation of the height of the rail running surface associated with rolling noise excitation, expressed as a function of distance x along the rail.
Acoustic roughness spectrum — Amplitude of the acoustic roughness expressed as a function of the wavelength λ. Note 1 to entry: Acoustic roughness spectrum is expressed in μm and usually presented in terms of acoustic roughness level in dB re 1 μm.
Acoustic track characteristics (ATC) — Characteristics of the track that are defined in terms of acoustic rail roughness and track decay rates (3.4).
Acoustical planning — Controlling future noise by planned measures, such as land-use planning, systems engineering for traffic, traffic planning, abatement by sound-insulation measures and noise control of sources.
ACP — African, Caribbean and Pacific States party to the Lomé Convention
Act of Accession of 16 April 2003 — The Act concerning the conditions of Accession of the Czech Republic, the Republic of Estonia, the Republic of Cyprus, the Republic of Latvia, the Republic of Lithuania, the Republic of Hungary, the Republic of Malta, the Republic of Poland, the Republic of Slovenia and the Slovak Republic and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded, adopted in Athens on 16 April 2003.
Act of Accession of 25 April 2005 — The Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Bulgaria and Romania and the adjustments to the Treaties on which the European Union is founded, adopted in Luxembourg on 25 April 2005
Act of Accession of 9 December 2011 — The Act concerning the conditions of accession of the Republic of Croatia and the adjustments to the Treaty on European Union, the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community, signed at Brussels on 9 December 2011.
Action — Any activity which has been identified as financially and technically independent, has a set time-frame and is necessary for the implementation of a project.
Action plans — Plans designed to manage noise issues and effects, including noise reduction if necessary.
Active level crossing — A level crossing where the crossing users are protected from or warned of the approaching train by devices activated when it is unsafe for the user to traverse the crossing. Protection by the use of physical devices includes: -    half or full barriers, -    gates. Warning by the use of fixed equipment at level crossings: -    visible devices: lights, -    audible devices: bells, horns, klaxons, etc. Active level crossings are classified as: (a)     Manual: a level crossing where user-side protection or warning is manually activated by a railway employee. (b)    Automatic with user-side warning: a level crossing where user-side warning is activated by the approaching train. (c)     Automatic with user-side protection: a level crossing where user-side protection is activated by the approaching train. This shall include a level crossing with both user-side protection and warning. (d)    Rail-side protected: a level crossing where a signal or other train protection system permits a train to proceed once the level crossing is fully user-side protected and is free from incursion.
Active level crossing — A level crossing where the crossing users are protected from or warned of the approaching train by devices activated when it is unsafe for the user to traverse the crossing. Protection by the use of physical devices includes: •	half or full barriers, •	gates. Warning by the use of fixed equipment at level crossings: •	visible devices: lights, •	audible devices: bells, horns, klaxons, etc. Active level crossings are classified as: a)	 Manual: a level crossing where user-side protection or warning is manually activated by a railway employee. b)	 Automatic with user-side warning: a level crossing where user-side warning is activated by the approaching train. c)	 Automatic with user-side protection: a level crossing where user-side protection is activated by the approaching train. This shall include a level crossing with both user-side protection and warning. d)	 Rail-side protected: a level crossing where a signal or other train protection system permits a train to proceed once the level crossing is fully user-side protected and is free from incursion. Sometimes also referred to as active grade crossing.
Active mode — The transport of people or goods, through non-motorised means, based on human physical activity, including vehicles with electric auxiliary propulsion as referred to in Article 2(2), point (h), of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council (29).
Actors — All parties which are, directly or through contractual arrangements, involved in the application of this Regulation.
Acts issued by the Agency — They are those listed in Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/796 of the European Parliament and of the Council (Agency Regulation)
Actual carrier/subcontractor — A third party who performs the carriage completely or partly.
Actual point (RP) — Physical end of a crossing vee.
AD — Automatic Driving mode
AD — ETCS Automatic Driving Mode
AD — Andorra
Ad hoc request — A request for capacity for the next annual timetable (if the request has been placed after the last day to place late path requests but before the timetable change) or for the running timetable (if the request has been placed after the timetable change).
Ad hoc request — Request for access to a service facility or a rail-related service that is linked to an ad hoc path request for an individual train path referred to in Article 48(1) of Directive 2012/34/EU.
Additional  information  on network characteristics — Any  additional  information  on  network characteristics   or   corresponding   docu ment available from the IM and stored by the Agency, e.g.; interference level, leading to  the  recommendation  of  additional  on- board protection
Additional service — May comprise traction current, charges for which shall be shown on the invoices separately from charges for using the electrical supply equipment, without prejudice to the application of Directive 2019/944; pre-heating of passenger trains; and tailor-made contracts (for the control of transport of dangerous goods and assistance in running abnormal trains).
Adequate rest — Workers have regular rest periods, the duration of which is expressed in units of time and which are sufficiently long and continuous to ensure that, as a result of fatigue or other irregular working patterns, they do not cause injury to themselves, to fellow workers or to others and that they do not damage their health, either in the short term or in the longer term.
ADIF — Spanish Railway Infrastructure Company
Admissibility — The fact that a document has all the intrinsic and extrinsic characteristics required by its reception context, necessary for it to be accepted as an expression of its author with all its legal consequences.
Admission of a type of construction — The right granted according to which the competent authority authorises a type of construction of a vehicle, as a basis for the admission to operation for vehicles which correspond to that type of construction, as evidenced by a Design Type Certificate.
Admission to operation — The right granted according to which the competent authority authorises a vehicle to operate in international traffic, as evidenced by a Certificate of Operation.
ADN — European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Inland Waterways
ADR — The European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road, concluded at Geneva on 30 September 1957, as amended.
ADR — European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road, United Nations, 2017
ADR — European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road
Advanced electronic seal — An electronic seal, which meets the requirements set out in Article 36.
Advanced electronic signature — An electronic signature which meets the requirements set out in Article 26.
AE — United Arab Emirates (the)
AEC — Atomic Energy Commission (USA)
AEIF — European Association for Railway Interoperability. Based in Brussels, it regrouped all stakeholders in the railway sector and had the mandate to maintain the ERTMS specifications and managed their change control process. The AEIF passed on its activities to the European Railway Agency in 2005.
Aerodynamic effects on the vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
Aerodynamic impact on passengers/materials on the platform — Aerodynamic disturbance to passengers/materials on platform including assessment methods and operational loading conditions.
Aerodynamic impact on track workers — Aerodynamic disturbance to track workers.
Aerosol or aerosol dispenser — An article consisting of any non-refillable receptacle meeting the requirements of 6.2.6, made of metal, glass or plastics and containing a gas, compressed, liquefied or dissolved under pressure, with or without a liquid, paste or powder, and fitted with a release device allowing the contents to be ejected as solid or liquid particles in suspension in a gas, as a foam, paste or powder or in a liquid state or in a gaseous state.
AERRL — Association of European Rail Rolling stock Lessors
AETR — European agreement concerning the Work of Crews of Vehicles engaged in International Road Transport
AF — Afghanistan
AF-weighted maximum sound pressure level LpAFmax — maximum value of the A‑weighted sound pressure level determined during the measurement time interval T by using time weighting F (fast)
AF-weighted sound pressure level history LpAF(t) — A‑weighted sound pressure level as a function of time with time weighting F (fast)
After sale conditions — Set of rules defining how a ticket can be managed after having been sold (how many times and within which time limits can be exchanged or refunded, which fees are to be paid, etc.)
After sales (operations) — The complex of activities that can take place after a ticket has been sold (typically exchange or refund)
AG — Antigua and Barbuda
AG — DE: Aktiengesellschaft
Age of vehicle — It is the length of time after the first registration of the goods road vehicle, irrespective of the registering country.
Agency — European Union Agency for Railways established by the Regulation (EU) 2016/796 of the European Parliament and of the Council
Agency — The European Railway Agency established by Regulation (EC) No 881/2004 (2) of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004.
Agency — A body governed by European public law and having its own legal personality.  There are two types of agency: • An executive agency, to which the Commission entrusts, under its own control and responsibility, certain tasks relating to the management EU programmes; • A decentralised agency, which is subject to the external control of the Court of Auditors  and to the annual discharge from the European Parliament
Agency — European Union Agency for Railways
Agent — A carrier’s point of sale for products to customers via its own distribution channel
Agglomeration — Part of a territory, delimited by the Member State, having a population in excess of 100 000 persons and a population density such that the Member State considers it to be an urbanised area.
Agreement — The main agreement, its Protocols and Annexes as well as the acts referred to therein.
AI — Anguilla
AID — (See USAID)
AIDS — Acquired immune deficiency syndrome
Air Container — Container conforming to standards laid down for air transportation.
Air Traffic Management/Air Navigation Service System or ATM/ANS System — ‘ATM/ANS system’ as defined in Article 3, point (7), of Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council (33).
Aircraft contact stand — A stand in a designated area of the airport apron equipped with a passenger boarding bridge.
Aircraft remote stand — A stand in a designated area of the airport apron not equipped with a passenger boarding bridge.
AIRGAP — The set of interfaces between track and train. It is composed of the Eurobalise, the Euroloop and the Euroradio interfaces.
AIRGAP Language — The ERTMS/ETCS application data, together with its harmonised rules, which is transmitted over the balise, loop and radio transmission media.
Airport — It is a defined area of land or water (including any buildings, installations and equipment) intended to be used either wholly or in part for the arrival, departure and surface movement of aircraft.
AIS — Automatic Identification System
AL — Albania
ALARP — As low as reasonably practicable
ALE — Adaptation & redundancy management Layer Entity
Alert limit — Refers to the value which, if exceeded, requires that the track geometry condition is analysed and considered in the regularly planned maintenance operations.
Alighting — The act by which a passenger gets out of a train
Allocating reservation system — See Attributing reservation system
Allocation — The allocation of railway infrastructure capacity by an infrastructure body.
Allocation — The allocation of railway infrastructure capacity by an infrastructure manager.
Allocation body — The authority and/or infrastructure manager designated by one of the Contracting Parties for the allocation of infrastructure capacity.
Allocation body — Body responsible for path allocation, which is independent in its legal form, organisation and decision-making from any railway undertaking (Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (1)).
Allocation of certificates for messages — Every participant in the RU/IM message exchange will have to use valid (X509) certificates for secure communication and if needed for message encryption and signature. These certificates are issued under the authority of the governance entity. Every company has to register once to central admin (currently this is the admin of CCG); The governance admin service will verify the user and will subsequently grant access to a secured website where certificate can be downloaded. The Expiry dates of the certificate are mentioned in the certificate. The company has to make sure to get a new certificate before.
Altener — Programme for the promotion of renewable energy sources
Alternative fuel — It is a type of motor energy other than the conventional fuels petrol and diesel. Alternative fuels include electricity, LPG, natural gas (NGL or CNG), alcohols, mixtures of alcohols with other fuels, hydrogen, biofuels (such as biodiesel), etc. (This list is not exhaustive.) Alternative fuels do not include unleaded petrol, reformulated petrol or city (low-sulphur) diesel.
Alternative fuel — Fuels or power sources which serve, at least partly, as a substitute for fossil oil sources in the energy used for transport and which have the potential to contribute to its decarbonisation and enhance the environmental performance of the transport sector, including: (a) ‘alternative fuels for zero-emission vehicles, trains, vessels or aircraft’: - electricity, - hydrogen, - ammonia, (b) ‘renewable fuels’: - biomass fuels, including biogas, and biofuels as defined in Article 2, points (27), (28) and (33), respectively, of Directive (EU) 2018/2001, - synthetic and paraffinic fuels, including ammonia, produced from renewable energy, (c) ‘non-renewable alternative fuels and transitional fossil fuels’: - natural gas in gaseous form (compressed natural gas (CNG)) and liquefied form (liquefied natural gas (LNG)), - liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), - synthetic and paraffinic fuels produced from non-renewable energy.
Alternative fuels — Alternative fuels for all modes of transport as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Directive 2014/94/EU.
Alternative fuels — Alternative fuels, as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Regulation (EU) 2023/1804.
Alternative fuels — Fuels or power sources which serve, at least partly, as a substitute for fossil oil sources in the energy supply to transport and which have the potential to contribute to its decarbonisation and enhance the environmental performance of the transport sector, consisting of: (a) electricity consumed in all types of electric vehicles; (b) hydrogen; (c) natural gas, including biomethane, in gaseous form (Compressed Natural Gas - CNG) and liquefied form (Liquefied Natural Gas - LNG); (d) Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG); (e) mechanical energy from on-board storage/on-board sources, including waste heat.
Alternative offer — Alternative timetable including path details that is offered in the path alteration process as an alternative to the path that is not available anymore.
Alternative route — Another route between the same origin and destination where there is substitutability between the two routes for the operation of the freight or passenger service concerned by the railway undertaking.
Alternatively fuelled vehicle — A motor vehicle powered wholly or in part by an alternative fuel and which has been approved under the framework of Directive 2007/46/EC.
Altitude — Refers to the altitude range to be considered for vehicles.
AM — Armenia
Amending letter — A budgetary act amending the draft budget proposed by the Commission (for the forthcoming year). It can only be done before the start of conciliation between the European Parliament and the Council.
ANC — African National Congress
Ancillary service — May comprise: access to the telecommunication networks; provision of supplementary information; technical inspection of rolling stock; ticketing services in passenger stations; heavy maintenance services supplied in maintenance facilities dedicated to high-speed trains or to other types of rolling stock requiring specific facilities (as referred to in 2012/34/EU, Annex II, point 4).
AND — The European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Inland Waterways.
AND — The European agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Inland Waterways, concluded at Geneva on 26 May 2000, as amended.
Animal material — Animal carcasses, animal body parts, foodstuffs or feedstuffs derived from animals.
Annoyance — The degree of community noise annoyance as determined by means of field surveys.
Annual Activity Report (AAR) (See also: AMPR) — The management report from each of the (50) Authorising Officers by Delegation to the Commission College. Annual Activity Reports are a key component of the accountability chain within the Commission and constitute the basis on which the Commission takes overall political responsibility for its.
Annual Management and Performance Report  (AMPR) — Yearly report providing a comprehensive overview of the performance, management and protection of the EU budget for the previous financial year. The Commission, by adopting this report, takes overall political responsibility for the management of the EU budget.
Annuality — The budgetary principle according to which expenditure and revenue are programmed and authorised for one year, starting on 1 January and ending on 31 December.
AO — Angola
APEC — Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Apex — Advance purchase excursion (fare). An Apex ticket is a ticket for a journey by air or rail which costs less than the standard ticket, but which must be booked a specified period in advance
API — Application Programming Interface
APN — Access Point Name
APOM/APIS — Authorisation for the Placing on the Market / Placing in Service (of structural subsystems and vehicles)
Applicable speed limit (in SR) — The lowest speed limit of: - maximum speed for SR, - maximum train speed, - timetable / Route Book, - temporary speed restrictions (transmitted by other means than European Instruction 1, 2, 5, 6, 7 or 8), - European Instruction.
Applicable speed limit (in SR) — The lowest speed limit of:       maximum speed for SR,       maximum train speed,       timetable / Route Book,       temporary  speed  restrictions  (transmitted  by  other  means than operational instruction), operational instruction.
Applicant — Contracting entity or manufacturer.
Applicant — The signatory of the ‘EC’ declaration of verification in accordance with Article 18 of Directive 2008/57/EC and asking for an authorisation for placing in service of a subsystem. Where the CSM RA is required under Article 15 of Directive 2008/57/EC, the role of the ‘proposer’ according to the CSM RA should be taken by the applicant for authorisation.
Applicant — A natural or legal person requesting an authorisation for placing a vehicle on the market
Applicant — A railway undertaking or an international grouping of railway undertakings or other persons or legal entities, such as competent authorities under Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council (2) and shippers, freight forwarders and combined transport operators, with a public-service or commercial interest in procuring infrastructure capacity (Directive 2012/34/EU). The applicant can take the roles and the assigned tasks and responsibilities of Lead RU (Lead railway undertaking) and/or Responsible Applicant and/or Responsible RU depending on specific network statement.
Applicant — In the case of conformity assessment, the manufacturer or its authorised representative in an RID Contracting State. In the case of periodic inspections, intermediate inspections and exceptional checks, applicant means the testing facility, the operator or their authorised representative in an RID Contracting State; NOTE: Exceptionally a third party (for instance a tank-container operator in accordance with the definition of 1.2.1) may apply for the conformity assessment.
Applicant — A natural or legal person requesting an authorisation, be it a  railway  undertaking,  an  infrastructure manager or any other person or legal entity, such as a manufacturer, an owner or a  keeper;  for  the purpose of Article 15, the ‘applicant’ means a contracting entity or a manufacturer, or  its authorised representatives; for the purpose of Article 19, the ‘applicant’ means a natural  or legal person requesting the Agency's  decision for the approval of the technical solutions envisaged for the ERTMS track-side equipment projects.
Applicant — A railway undertaking or an international grouping of railway undertakings or other persons or legal entities, such as competent authorities under Regulation (EC) No 1370/2007 and shippers, freight forwarders and combined transport operators, with a public-service or commercial interest in procuring infrastructure capacity.
Applicant — A natural person or an entity with or without legal personality who has submitted an application in a grant award procedure or in a contest for prizes.
Applicant — An entity or a single person having established a company that applies for recognition to provide training courses relating to training tasks referred to in Article 23(5) and (6) of Directive 2007/59/EC, including a single person applying for recognition as examiner referred to in Article 25(1) and (2) of Directive 2007/59/EC.
Applicant for vehicle/network project — The entity asking for an authorisation for placing in service of a vehicle or network project respectively. Where the CSM RA is required under Article 15 of Directive 2008/57/EC, the role of the ‘proposer’ according to the CSM RA should be taken by the applicant for authorisation.
Application document — Application document’ means a tender, a request to participate, a grant application or an application in a contest for prizes.
Application layer — In the stack of protocols, the component that manages and interprets the data specific of an application. The exchange of data between the application layers of two connected systems takes place at application level
Application level — The different ERTMS/ETCS application levels are a way to express the possible operating relationships between track and train. Level definitions are related to the trackside equipment used, to the way the trackside information reaches the on-board units and to which functions are processed in the trackside and in the on-board equipment respectively.
Appropriations — Amount of commitments/payments that can be committed/paid after receipt of contributions.
Approval — See Multilateral approval  and Unilateral Approval
AQ — Antarctica
AR — Argentina
Area of implementation of GPRS — Indication of the area in which GPRS can be used for ETCS
Area of operation — A network or networks within one or more Member States where a railway undertaking intends to operate.
Area of operation — A network or networks within one or more Member States where a railway undertaking intends to operate (Directive (EU) 2016/798).
Area of use of a vehicle — A network or networks within a Member State or a group of Member States in which a vehicle is intended to be used, as referred to in Article 2 of Directive (EU) 2016/797
Area of use of a vehicle — A network or  networks within a Member State or a group of  Member States in  which a vehicle is intended to be used.
Area of use of a vehicle — The networks located within two or more Contracting States in which a vehicle is intended to be used.
Arrangement of pantographs — Parameter without explanation in the document
Arrival — The moment when the doors of the train are opened on the destination platform and disembarkation is allowed
Arrival date/time, actual — The actual date (And time) of arrival of means of transport
Arrival date/time, estimated — The date (And time) of arrival of means of transport based on the current forecast
Arrival date/time, planned — The date (And time) of arrival of means of transport in the timetable
Arrival delay, actual — The time difference between the arrival date/time actual and the arrival date/time Planned
Arrival delay, expected — The time difference between the arrival date/time Estimated and the arrival date/time Planned
Arrival time — The time at which a train arrives at a station or other halt.
ARS — Automatic Route Setting
ARS function — Application, Registration and data Storage functions
Articulated bus — A bus consisting of two rigid sections connected to each other by an articulated section. On this type of vehicle the passenger compartments in each of the two rigid sections shall be intercommunicating. The articulated section shall permit the free movement of travellers between the rigid sections. Connection and disconnection of the two sections shall be possible only in a workshop.
Articulated vehicle — A motor vehicle coupled to a semi-trailer.
AS — American Samoa
ASBL — FR: association sans but lucratif
ASCII — American Standard Code for Information Interchange
ASEAN — Association of South-East Asian Nations (Brunei, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar/Burma, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam)
ASEM — Asia-Europe Meeting
ASOR — Agreement on the international carriage of passengers by road by means of occasional coach and bus services
ASP — Axle Load speed Profile
ASPM — Automatic Stopping Point Management ASR
ASR — Additional Speed Restriction
ASS — Abbreviation in B.5 for “seat” (place ASSise)
Assembly — Fabrication of materials, products and/or composites. EXAMPLE:Sandwich panels. Note 1 to entry: The assembly may include an air gap.
Assembly before putting into service — Checking on site that the actual product or subsystem complies with the relevant design parameters just before putting it into operation.
Assessment — The conformity assessment resulting of the combination of audits of a maintenance system and inspections as described in this document.
Assessment — Any method used to calculate, predict, estimate or measure the value of a noise indicator or the related harmful effects.
Assessment body — The notified body, designated body or risk assessment body.
Assessment body — The independent and competent external or internal individual, organisation or entity which undertakes investigation to provide a judgement, based on evidence, of the suitability of a system to fulfil its safety requirements.
Assessment of suitability for use — The process demonstrating whether requirements for suitability for use specified in the relevant TSI relating to an interoperability constituent have been fulfilled.
Assessment team — A person or group of persons assigned by the certification body to perform the assessment work according to the provisions defined by applying the certification body quality management system. The assessment team shall be free from any commercial, financial and other pressures that might influence its tasks.
Asset Management — Describes the systematic and coordinated activities through which a rail infrastructure manager optimally manages its assets, e.g. tracks or signalling, and their performance, risks and expenditures over their life cycle.
Asset management — The approach used by an organisation to ensure that physical assets remain safe, fit-for- purpose, and commercially viable from design and construction, throughout its life cycle, to decommissioning.
Assigned revenue External/InternaL — Dedicated revenue received to finance specific items of expenditure such as financial contributions from third countries to programmes financed by the Union (external) or revenue from third parties in respect of goods, services or work supplied at their request (internal).
ASTM — The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, PO Box C700, West Conshohocken, PA, 19428-2959, United States of America)
Asymmetric keys — Couple of keys used in a cryptographic system, one to lock or encrypt the plaintext, and one to unlock or decrypt the cyphertext. Neither key will do both functions. One of these keys is published or public and the other is kept private.
AT — Austria
At the discretion of — That the railway undertaking can decide based on its experience and its needs
ATB — Automated Ticket and Boarding
ATB printing process — Printing process defined by IATA resolution 722e for automated issue of air tickets and boarding passes. The card to be printed is held in the printer as a roll or a fan-folded pile. Printing is by ink ribbon or by a thermal printing process
ATC — Automatic Train Control
ATE — Automated test equipment
ATMF — Uniform Rules concerning the Technical Admission of Railway Material used in International Traffic (ATMF - Appendix G to COTIF)
Atmosferic storage — Storage tanks maintained at ambient temperature and pressure and containing a substance in a liquid state.
Atmospheric transport equipment — Transport equipment maintained at ambient temperature and pressure and containing a substance in a liquid state.
ATO — Automatic train operation
ATO — Automated Train Operation
ATO — Automatic Train Operation
ATO  communication  system — Supported  ATO  communication  systems  from  trackside
ATO  Grade  of  Automation — ATO  grade  of  automation  installed  lineside.
ATO  System  version — ATO system version according to the specification referenced in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
ATO Area — The area where, for Grades of Automation (GoA) 2 to 4, Automatic Train Operation is possible, informed by real-time dynamic update of operational data via a telecommunications link between the ATO-OB and ATO-TS subsystems.
ATO Disengaged — The status of the ATO-OB when it is not in EG, nor in DE State.
ATO Engage Button — Input that permits the driver to request to start automatic driving when the ATO Engagement Conditions are fulfilled.
ATO Fitted Train — A train that is fitted with an ATO-OB subsystem.
ATO Inhibition Zone — The prevention of the ATO functionality over a defined area of the railway in the direction of travel. It may be in either or both directions of a bi-directional section of track.
ATO On-board — The subsystem and set of automated non-safety-related driver functions, depending on the grade of automation.
ATO Operated Train — A train that is fitted with an ATO-OB subsystem and this subsystem is operational.
ATO Operational Speed Profile — The most energy efficient speed profile calculated by the ATO-OB that fulfils the Journey Profile and respects the ETCS safe braking envelope.
ATO Trackside — A set of functions that interfaces with the necessary trackside systems which contain the operational data and infrastructure data that is required by the ATO-OB.
ATO-OB — ATO On-board
ATO-TS — ATO Trackside
ATP — Automatic Train Protection
ATS — Automatic Train Supervision
ATSM — Automatic Train Stopping Management AV
Attempted suicide — An act to deliberately injure oneself resulting in serious injury.
Attempted suicide — Act to deliberately injure oneself resulting in serious injury, but not in death, as recorded and classified by the competent national authority.
Attributing reservation system — An electronic system hosting the catalogue of transport services for which a transport service provider authorises distributors to issue travel documents (from the TAP glossary)
Attributing system — An electronic system hosting the catalogue of transport services for which a transport service provider authorises distributors to issue travel documents
Attributing system — A reservation system performing the function of receiving reservation requests and sending replies
Attributing system — An electronic system hosting the catalogue of transport services for which a transport service provider authorises distributors to issue travel documents (from the TAP glossary)
Attributor — A company managing an attributing system. May be a carrier.
Attributor — A company responsible for an attributing system
Attributor — A company responsible for an attributing system.
Attributor — An undertaking managing the system which attributes seats and accommodation and the relevant fares (including IRT). At the same time the attributor may be a carrier, distributor, issuing undertaking and/or sales point.
AU — Australia
AU — African Union (replaced the OAU; see http://www.africa-union.org/)
Audible communication system — E.g. for communication between: the train crew, or between the train crew (see parameter 10.2.3) and people inside/outside of the train (for passenger alarm see parameter 10.2.3 - Passenger alarm). Excluded: train radio (see chapter 12).
Audible signal systems — Requirements concerning vehicle mounted audible signalling systems (e.g. warning horn). Refers to: - warning horn tones; - warning horn sound pressure level (outside cab, for internal sound level see parameter 9.2.1.2 - Noise in driver's cab); - protection of the device; - control of the device; - verification of sound pressure levels.
Audit — Systematic, independent and documented process for obtaining objective evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which audit criteria are fulfilled.(ISO 9000:2015, §3.13.1)
Audit — Systematic, independent and documented process for obtaining audit evidence and evaluating it objectively to determine the extent to which the audit criteria are fulfilled (ISO 9000).
Audit — A formal examination of an organisation’s or individual’s accounts or financial situation. The EU is subject to both an external and an internal audit to provide complete, accurate and readily available information on budgetary and policy implementation: - External audit: audit performed by the European Court of Auditors (ECA), the Union’s independent external auditor. The ECA checks if the budget of the European Union has been implemented correctly, and that EU funds have been raised and spent legally and in accordance with the principles of sound financial management. - Internal audit: audit performed by a body’s staff rather than an independent certified public accountant. The internal auditor is designated by the institution, which it must advise on how to deal with risks; it issues independent opinions on the performance and quality of management and control systems, and recommends improvements.
AUT — Abbreviation in B.5 for “Car-carrying train” (train AUTo)
Authentication — The process of determining whether someone or something is who or what it is declared to be.
Authentication — An electronic process that enables the electronic identification of a natural or legal person, or the origin and integrity of data in electronic form to be confirmed.
Authentication key — Cryptographic key (KMAC) used to establish a safe connection according to the EURORADIO protocol.
Authenticity — The fact that a record can be proved to be what it purports to be, to have been created or sent by the person purported to have created or sent it and to have been created or sent when purported.
Authorisation — The authorisation, licence or concession required under the legislation of the Contracting Party.
Authorisation — Authorisation for placing on the market
Authorisation for ERTMS train movement — Permission for a train to move given by means of: - a trackside signal at proceed aspect, or - an MA, or - a European Instruction:        - to start after preparing a movement, or        - to pass EOA, or        - to proceed after trip.
Authorisation for ERTMS train movement — Permission for a train to move given by means of: - a trackside signal at proceed aspect, or - an MA, or - a European Instruction:      -  to start in SR after preparing a train movement or,      - to pass an EOA or,     - to proceed after train trip.
Authorisation to be renewed — Decision taken by an authorising entity according to which an authorisation for a vehicle type needs to be renewed in accordance with Article 24(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 and no vehicle may be authorised to be placed on the market on the basis of its conformity to the given type. Authorisation to be renewed status for a vehicle type does not affect the vehicles already in use.
Authorised Public Body — A public authority having a statutory obligation or right to provide members of the public with travel information and also refers to the public authority which is responsible for the enforcement of Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007 pursuant to Article 30(1) of the Regulation
Authorised Public body — A public authority having a statutory obligation or right to provide members of the public with travel information and also refers to the public authority which is responsible for the enforcement of Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007 pursuant to Article 30(from the TAP glossary) of the Regulation (from the TAP glossary)
Authorised representative — Any natural or legal person established within the Union who has received a written mandate from a manufacturer or a contracting entity to act on their behalf in relation to specified tasks.
Authorised representative — Any natural or legal person established within the Community who has received a written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf in relation to specified tasks.
Authorised representative — Any  natural  or  legal  person  established  within  the  Union  who  has  received  a written mandate from a manufacturer or a contracting entity to act on behalf of that manufacturer or contracting entity in relation to specified tasks.
Authorised representative — Any natural or legal person established within the Union who has received a written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf in relation to specified tasks.
Authorised representative — Any natural or legal person established within the Community who has received a written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf in relation to specified tasks with regard to the latter's obligations under the relevant Community legislation.
Authorising decision — The decision or a set of decisions, which may be of an administrative nature, taken simultaneously or successively by an authority or by authorities of a Member State, not including administrative and judicial appeal authorities, under a national legal system and administrative law that determine whether or not a project promoter is entitled to implement the project on the geographical area concerned, without prejudice to any decision taken in the context of an administrative or judicial appeal procedure.
Authorising entity — Entity (NSA or the Agency) that authorised the vehicle for placing on the market
Authorising entity — The entity that issues the vehicle type authorisation and/or vehicle authorisation for placing on the market.
Authorising Entity — For vehicles and/or vehicle types, NSAs or Agency authorising  the vehicle type and/or the placing on the market of vehicle(s). For trackside, the NSA authorising to place in service.
Authorising officer — The officer responsible in each institution for authorising revenue and expenditure operations in accordance with the principles of sound financial management and for ensuring that the requirements of legality and regularity are complied with.
Authorising train movements — The operation of equipment in signalling centres, electric traction current supply control rooms and traffic control centres that permits train movement. This does not include those staff employed by a railway undertaking who are responsible for management of resources such as train crew or rolling stock.
Automatic authentication — The authentication of a vehicle at a recharging point through the recharging connector or telematics.
Automatic coupling — Requirements and accepted types of automatic coupling systems. It takes into account electrical, mechanical and pneumatic.
Automatic driving mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode where the ERTMS/ATO on-board substitutes the driver for acting on the traction/brakes of the train according to the ERTMS/ATO journey profile, with the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment still giving full protection against overspeed and overrun.
Automatic dropping device required — Indication of whether an automatic dropping  device  (ADD)  required  on  the  vehicle.
Automatic Joining — An automatic process to couple two or more train consists.
Automatic Splitting — An automatic process to separate a train into two or more individual consists.
Automatic Train Operation — A method of operation in which different train operation tasks are automated, according to the Grade of Automation (GoA) level present, up to GoA 4 level, where the train is automatically controlled without the presence of staff on board. In the context of ERTMS, the terms “ATO” and “ERTMS/ATO” have the same meaning.
Automatic train protection — A safety system that enforces either compliance with or observation of speed restrictions and signal aspects by trains.
Automatic Turnback — The functionality that allows trains to change direction for another journey which may include automatic unattended movement.
Auxiliary — The servants or other persons whose services the carrier or the manager makes use of for the performance of the contract when these servants or other persons are acting within the scope of their functions.
AV — ATO Available
Availability — The information (transport service, type of offer, tariff, other service) that can actually be obtained by a passenger at a given point in time, for a specific train. Not to be confused with offer, indicating that a (transport service, type of offer, tariff, other service) is offered in the initial planning, but could be sold out and is therefore not obtainable by a passenger at a given time point, for a specific train
Availability — The ability of a product to be in a state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant in time or over a given time interval assuming that the required external resources are provided. (3) Definitions for other availability related terms are given in reference 3
Availability — Ability of a product to be in a state to perform a required function under given conditions at a given instant of time or over a given time interval assuming that the required external resources are provided.
Availability by the IM of additional information — Availability by the IM of additional information as defined in point  (2)  of  point  4.2.2.6.2  of  TSI  OPE
Availability of data — The existence of data in a digital machine-readable format.
Average costs — Total costs in a period, divided by the quantity (output) produced/consumed in that period. Long term average costs include a share of fixed costs (e.g. costs associated with expansion of infrastructure).
Average heat for sustained burning — Average of the values of heat for sustained burning, measured at a number of specified positions. Note 1 to entry: The average heat for sustained burning is expressed in megajoules per square metre (MJ/m2).
AW — Aruba
Awake Train — This function is intended to prepare a train for operation.
Award procedure — A procurement procedure, a grant award procedure, a contest for prizes, or a procedure for the selection of experts or persons or entities implementing the budget pursuant to point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1).
AX — Åland Islands
Axle bearing condition monitoring — Parameter covers the axle box and hot axle box detection (‘HABD’) (on-board HABD and interfaces with trackside detectors).
Axle load — Sum of the static vertical wheel forces exerted on the track through a wheelset or a pair of independent wheels divided by acceleration of gravity.
Axle load and wheel load — Axle load and wheel load are mainly an operational issue (referring to the line class). The parameter refers to the understanding of the mass system, to ensure that the same understanding of the mass and load calculations are given (e.g. minimum and maximum axle load).  Refer to parameter 3.3 (Bogies/running gear) for the structural strength of axles and wheels.
Axle shaft — Requirements on the axle shaft (e.g. strength, strength calculation, material, surface roughness, surface protection/paint coat, marking, ability for non-destructive testing).
AZ — Azerbaijan
BA — Bosnia and Herzegovina
Backing board — Non-combustible board with the same width and length as the test specimen and (12,5 ± 3) mm thick, used in every test to back the specimen. SEE:    Note 1 to entry: A non-combustible board is one that, when tested to ISO 1716[10], yields a gross calorific potential (PCS) of ≤ 2,0 MJ/kg.
Bag — A flexible packaging made of paper, plastics film, textiles, woven material or other suitable material.
Balise — A passive transponder mounted on the track which can communicate with a train passing over it.
Balise Group — One or more balises which are treated as having the same reference location on the track. The telegrams transmitted by all the balises of a group form a track-to-train message.
Balise group Co-ordinate system — The means to ensure common location referencing between on- board and trackside, for all location based information exchanged through the ERTMS/ETCS transmission media.
Balise group location reference — Location of balise number 1 in a balise group. It is the origin of the balise group coordinate system
Balise transmission module — A module inside the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment for intermittent transmission between track and train, which processes Up-link signals and retrieves application data telegrams from a balise.
Balise, fixed — A balise that transmits data that does not change dynamically according to signalling information.
Balise, switchable — A balise that transmits data that can change dynamically according to signalling information.
Ballast pick-up and projection onto neighbouring property — May refer also to ice pick-up.
Barcode — An optical machine-readable representation of data, which shows data about the object to which it attaches.
Barrier — A technical, operational or organisational risk control measure outside the system under assessment that either reduces the frequency of occurrence of a hazard or mitigates the severity of the potential consequence of that hazard.
Baseline — A baseline is defined by a stable kernel in terms of system functionality, performance and other non-functional characteristics.
Baseline — A stable kernel of interrelated legal and technical documents, in terms of system functionality, performance and other non-functional characteristics.
Baseline Release — A baseline release is defined by a specific version of each of the CCS TSI annex A documents that are relevant for the system.
Basic act — Act of secondary law (regulation, directive or decision) laying down the objectives and conditions for budget implementation.
Basic design characteristics — The characteristics of a subsystem as defined in the type or design examination certificate.
Basic design characteristics — Parameters that are used to identify the vehicle type as specified in the issued vehicle type authorisation and recorded in the European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles (‘ERATV’) (Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/545)
Basic design characteristics — The parameters that are used to identify the vehicle type as specified in the issued vehicle type authorisation and recorded in the European Register of Authorised Vehicle Types (‘ERATV’).
Basic design characteristics — Parameters that are used to identify the vehicle type as specified in the issued vehicle type authorisation and recorded in the European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles (‘ERATV’)  (Article 2(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/545)
Basic parameter — Any regulatory, technical or operational condition which is critical to interoperability and is specified in the relevant TSIs. (Article 2(12) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Basic parameter — Any regulatory, technical or operational condition which is critical to interoperability and requires a decision in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 21(2) before any development of draft TSIs by the joint representative body.
Basic parameter — Any regulatory, technical or operational condition which is critical to interoperability and is specified in the relevant TSIs.
Basic service — A service supplied in any of the service facilities listed in point 2 of Annex II to Directive 2012/34/EU.
Basket wagon — A rail wagon with a demountable subframe, fitted with devices for vertical handling, to allow the loading and unloading of semi-trailers or road vehicles.
Battery electric vehicle — An electric vehicle that runs exclusively on the electric motor, with no secondary source of propulsion.
Battery-wagon — A wagon containing elements which are linked to each other by a manifold and permanently fixed to this wagon. The following elements are considered to be elements of a battery-wagon: cylinders, tubes, bundles of cylinders (also known as frames), pressure drums as well as tanks destined for the carriage of gases as defined in 2.2.2.1.1 with a capacity of more than 450 litres.
BB — Barbados
Bbasic act — A legal act, other than a recommendation or an opinion, which provides a legal basis for an action and for the implementation of the corresponding expenditure entered in the budget or of the budgetary guarantee or financial assistance backed by the budget, and which may take any of the following forms: (a) in implementation of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) and the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community (the Euratom Treaty), the form of a regulation, a directive or a decision within the meaning of Article 288 TFEU; or (b) in implementation of Title V of the Treaty on European Union (TEU), one of the forms specified in Articles 28(1) and 31(2), Article 33, and Articles 42(4) and 43(2) TEU.
BC-NET — Business cooperation network
BCA — Baseline Compatibility Assessment
BCC — Business Cooperation Centre
BCD — Binary Coded Decimal
BD — Bangladesh
BE — Belgium
Bearings on the wheelset — Requirements on wheelset bearings (e.g. strength, strength calculation, material, manufacturing method).
Belonging to a quieter route — Belonging  to  a  ‘quieter  route’  in  accordance  with  Article  5b of  TSI  NOI
Beneficiary — An entity with legal personality with which a grant agreement has been signed.
Beneficiary — A natural person or an entity with or without legal personality with whom a grant agreement has been signed.
Beneficiary — Legal entity (private or public) receiving funds.
Benelux — Economic Union of Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands
BEREC — Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications
BEUC — European Bureau of Consumers’ Unions
BF — Burkina Faso
BG — Bulgaria
bg — Bulgarian
Bg arrangement — Arrangement with one friction element per friction element holder
Bgu arrangement — Arrangement with two friction elements per friction element holder
BH — Bahrain
BI — Burundi
Bi-directional recharging — A smart recharging operation where the direction of the electricity flow can be reversed, allowing that electricity flows from the battery to the recharging point it is connected to.
BIC — 1. Business and innovation centre 2. EU measure for the creation and development of business and innovation centres and their network
Big  Metal  Mass — Indication  of  existence  of  metal  mass  in  the  vicinity  of  the location,  susceptible of  perturbating the  reading  of  balises by the  on-board  system.
Big Bag — A removable internal liner, strong enough to be lifted and to carry bulk cargoes of different types.
Bimondal semi-trailer (Rail-Road) — A road semi-trailer that can be converted into a rail wagon by the addition of rail bogies.
Binding corporate rules — Personal data protection policies which are adhered to by a controller or processor established on the territory of a Member State for transfers or a set of transfers of personal data to a controller or processor in one or more third countries within a group of undertakings, or group of enterprises engaged in a joint economic activity.
Binding requirement — An obligation, prohibition, condition, criterion or limit of a legal, organisational, semantic or technical nature, which is set by a Union entity or a public sector body concerning one or more transEuropean digital public services and which has an effect on cross-border interoperability.
Biofuels — Fuels derived directly or indirectly from biomass. Biofuels used for non-energy purposes are excluded from the scope of energy statistics (for example wood used for construction or as furniture, biolubricant for engine lubrication and biobitumen used for road surface). Biofuels can be split up into three categories: Solid biofuels (fuelwood, wood residues, wood pellets, animal waste, vegetal material, ...) Liquid biofuels (biogasoline, biodiesel, bio jet kerosene, ...) Biogases (from anaerobic fermentation and from thermal processes)
Biogas — It is a gas composed principally of methane and carbon dioxide produced by anaerobic digestion of biomass or by thermal processes from biomass, including biomass in waste. In energy statistics, biogas is a product aggregate equal to the sum of landfill gas, sewage sludge gas, other biogases from anaerobic digestion and biogases from thermal processes.
Biometric data — Personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, which allow or confirm the unique identification of that natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopic data.
BIU — Brake Interface Unit, used with regards to STM
BJ — Benin
BKD — Breakdown
BL — Saint Barthélemy
Blending facility or platform — A cooperation framework established between the Commission and development or other public finance institutions with a view to combining non-repayable forms of support and/or financial instruments and/or budgetary guarantees from the budget and repayable forms of support from development or other public finance institutions, as well as from private-sector finance institutions and private-sector investors.
Blending operation — Actions supported by the Union budget, including within blending facilities pursuant to Article 2, point (6), of the Financial Regulation combining non-repayable forms of support and/or financial instruments and/or budgetary guarantees from the Union budget with repayable forms of support from development or other public finance institutions, as well as from commercial finance institutions and investors.
BLEU — Belgo-Luxembourg Economic Union
BLEVE and possible fireball — The term BLEVE is an acronym for Boiling Liquid Expanding Vapour Explosion). The BLEVE is one type of phenomena that may result from a catastrophic rupture. A BLEVE may occur when a vessel, containing a liquid highly superheated above its normal atmospheric boiling point, fails catastrophically. The risk of a BLEVE is typically associated with pressurized liquefied gas storage or pressurized liquids. The first consequence of a BLEVE is a blast effect due to vapour expansion when the vessel fails and to the explosive vapourization of the vessel liquid content. This effect is generally followed by missiles ejection. If the substance is flammable, the air- substance aerosol can ignite immediately. The flame front rapidly moves away from the ignition point, generating a fireball. Its temperature is extremely high and it causes an important thermal radiation.
Block — A method of controlling the separation between trains by dividing the line into sections with, normally, no more than one train in each section. The block can either be a fixed block or a moving block.
Block train — A specific form of a direct train with only as much wagons as needed, running between two transhipment points without intermediate marshalling.
BM — Bermuda
BMM — Big Metal Mass
BN — Brunei Darussalam
BO — Bolivia (Plurinational State of)
Boarding — The act by which a passenger gets on a train
Boarding aids — Refers to technical specifications of equipment which may be on board to facilitate the access/excess for passengers to/from the vehicle.
Body — (For all categories of IBC other than composite IBCs):  the receptacle proper, including openings and closures, but does not include service equipment.
Body governed by public law — A body defined in point (4) of Article 2(1) of Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (15).
Bogie — Railway vehicle-mounted pivoting assembly comprising frame, wheels or wheelsets, suspension and optionally traction and braking components and other equipment used to support a railway vehicle body on rails.
Bogies — Requirements concerning bogie frame design and strength as well as bogie overall design.
Bogies/running gear — Parameter without explanation in the document
Boilover and resulting pool fire — Typically associated with a tank fire, the boilover phenomenon is the sudden and violent eruption of burning liquid out of an atmospheric storage on fire. This is the consequence of vapourization of liquid water in the bottom of th e tank. An atmospheric storage can lead to a boilover if the following requirements are met: ·         Presence of water in the bottom of the tank ·         The formation of a heat wave which meets the water layer under the hydrocarbons mass ·         A sufficiently viscous hydrocarbon so that the water vapour cannot easily go through it from the tank bottom ·         An average boiling temperature higher than the one of the water at the pressure of interface water/hydrocarbon. The condition is the following for the usual hydrocarbon storage TBUL HC> 393K (120°C) ·         A range of boiling temperatures large enough to generate a heat wave, that is to say, 60° beyond the boiling temperature of the water at the pressure of interface.
Booked capacity — Capacity requested and reserved by one RU, by another Applicant, or by the IM for maintenance purposes or for the transport of rail vehicles used for maintenance work on behalf of the IM, which is not available to other RUs or other Applicants anymore. This definition is of an operational nature.
Booking — The process of making a reservation for space on a means of transport for the movement of goods.
Booking — The operation of obtaining the reservation of an accommodation on a train
Booking — Synonym of reservation
Booking (selling) — The selling of a ticket with or without a reservation
Booking class — One of a limited set of predefined price levels that can correspond to a single tariff, in yield or quota managed pricing systems
Border crossing — Location where trains cross from a railway network in one Member State to a railway network in another Member State.
Border point — The location at which an international border is formally crossed.
Border point (Tariff -) — A conventional location used to indicate where the responsibility of the passenger is passed from one RU to the next one in case of successive carriers
Border section — A border section is a special section between two IM’s. The problem is the differences between IM responsibilities. Some border sections can have different definitions of where the responsibility lies. This is the: • Legal responsibility between IM’s for interoperable traffic. The network border is a point where legal responsibility changes between the IMs (this is the handover point). This can be but does not have to be in conjunction with a state border. • Timetable responsibility between IM’s for interoperable traffic. This is the point where there is a change to the timetable responsibility. This can be a mutual border point agreement between the IM’s.
Border section — Mutually agreed section on the railway line usually defined/bounded by the neighboring border railway stations and divided by a State border line.
Border station — A station that coincides with a Tariff border point
Bottleneck — A physical, technical, functional, operational or administrative barrier which leads to a system break, including systematic congestion or standstill, affecting the continuity of traffic for long-distance or cross-border flows.
Bow-tie method — The bow-tie is a risk assessment method used to identify critical events, build accident scenarios, and study the effectiveness and influence of safety barriers.
Box — A packaging with complete rectangular or polygonal faces, made of metal, wood, plywood, reconstituted wood, fibreboard, plastics or other suitable material. Small holes for purposes of ease of handling or opening or to meet classification requirements, are permitted as long as they do not compromise the integrity of the packaging during carriage.
BQ — Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba
BR — Brazil
Brackets — Requirements for means needed to mount/attach vehicle-external signalling devices (e.g. end-of-train signals, signal lamps, flags).
Brake blocks — Parameter without explanation in the document
Brake command — Parameter without explanation in the document
Brake discs — Parameter without explanation in the document
Brake pads — Parameter without explanation in the document
Brake performance — Parameter without explanation in the document
Brake performance calculation — Requirements concerning the brake performance calculation, e.g. applicable wheel diameters, load conditions, friction coefficients, control modes.
Brake requirements for rescue purposes — Requirements concerning the ability of brake systems regarding rescue of a train/vehicle, e.g. opportunity to release and isolate all brakes, controllability of the brake system of the rescued train/vehicle from other vehicles, compatibility with other types of brake in degraded mode. For rescue purposes of a train/vehicle usually the opportunity to release and isolate all brakes is necessary.
Brake state and fault indication — Requirements concerning the indication of the brake status to the driver/staff, e.g. brake energy availability, brake status of the several brake systems.
Brake system or brake — Combination of brake unit(s) with their trainwide/local control device(s) ensuring one or more braking function(s). Note 1 to entry: Brakes and brake systems can also be used for other functions e.g. shunting, de-icing of friction brake units. Note 2 to entry: For definition of "brake unit" see ISO 24478, 3.1.3.
Brake system - Recognised architecture and associated standards — Reference to existing solutions, e.g. UIC (‘Union International des Chemins de fer’) brake system.
Braking — Parameter without explanation in the document
Braking — Process generating controlled forces which result in the deceleration of the train, or maintaining a constant speed on a falling gradient, or preventing a stationary train from moving.
Braking adhesion management — Parameter without explanation in the document
Braking curve — Prediction of the train speed decrease versus distance by the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment, from a mathematical model of the train braking dynamics and of the track characteristics ahead.
Braking distance, emergency — The distance in which a train is capable of stopping with the emergency brake applied. Dependent upon train speed, train type, braking characteristics, train weight and gradient.
Braking distance, service — The distance in which a train is capable of stopping, with the full service brake applied. Dependent upon train speed, train type, braking characteristics, train weight and gradient.
Braking force production — Parameter without explanation in the document
Braking safety margins — Requirements for the set of specifications No 1 in Table A2 of the Annex A to the CCS TSI laid down in Decision 2012/88/EU related to the reliability of the braking curve for the on-board CCS.
Braking systems independent of wheel-rail adhesion conditions — Braking systems independent of wheel – rail adhesion conditions’ refers to all brake systems of the rolling stock capable to develop a brake force applied to the rails indepen dently of the wheel – rail adhesion conditions (e.g. magnetic braking systems and eddy current braking systems)
Brand — A commercial name identifying a family of transport services operated by an entity
Breach on the shell in liquid phase — This critical event is a hole with a given diameter on the shell of equipment containing a substance in liquid phase (below the surface of the liquid), leading to a continuous release. This hole can be due to a mechanical stress from external or internal causes causing a deterioration of mechanical properties of the structure.
Breach on the shell in vapour phase — This critical event is a hole with a given diameter on the shell of the equipment containing a substance in vapour phase (above the surface of the liquid if a liquid phase is present) leading to a continuous release. This hole can be due to a mechanical stress from external or internal causes causing a deterioration of mechanical properties of the structure. This event also includes a breach on equipment where a solid material is suspended in air or in gas.
Bridging plate — Is a retractable device integrated into the vehicle as close as possible to the door threshold level, fully automatic and activated in conjunction with the door opening/closing sequences.
Broken axle on rolling stock in service — A break affecting the axle and creating a risk of accident (derailment or collision).
Broken rail — Any rail which is separated in two or more pieces, or any rail from which a piece of metal becomes detached, causing a gap of more than 50 mm in length and more than 10 mm in depth on the running surface.
Broken wheel on rolling stock in service — A break affecting the wheel and creating a risk of accident (derailment or collision).
BS — Bahamas (the)
BSC — Base Station Controller
BSE — Bovine spongiform encephalopathy
BT — Bhutan
BTM — Balise Transmission Module
BTO — Basic Transport Operations
BTS — Base Transceiver Station
Budget — Annual financial plan, drawn up according to budgetary principles, that provides forecasts and authorises, for each financial year, an estimate of future costs and revenue and expenditures and their detailed description and justification, the latter included in budgetary remarks.
Budget implementation — The carrying out of activities relating to the management, monitoring, control and auditing of budget appropriations in accordance with the methods provided for in Article 62.
Budget implementation — Consumption of the budget through expenditure and revenue operations
Budget line/ Budget title/  Budget chapter/Budget  article / Budget item — Identifier of a given expenditure from the EU budget. The EU budget is structured around titles (two digits: TT), chapters (four digits: TT.CC), articles (six digits: TT.CC.AA) and items (eight digits: TT.CC.AA.PP). If you know the exact budget line number, you can search by entering the 2, 4, 6 or 8-digit code (including the dots).
Budgetary authority — The Institutions with decision making powers on budgetary matters, i.e. the European Parliament and the EU Council of Ministers
Budgetary commitment — The operation by which the authorising officer responsible reserves the budget appropriations necessary to cover subsequent payments to honour legal commitments.
Budgetary commitment — A reservation of appropriations to cover for subsequent expenses.
Budgetary guarantee — A legal commitment of the Union to support a programme of actions by taking on the budget a financial obligation that can be called upon should a specified event materialise during the implementation of the programme, and that remains valid for the duration of the maturity of the commitments made under the supported programme.
Budgetary guarantee — A written commitment, financially backed by the Union budget, to assume responsibility for all or part of a third party’s debt or obligation or for the successful performance by that third party of its obligations if an event occurs which triggers such guarantee, such as a loan default.
Buffing — Requirements for buffers and buffing systems related to vehicle coupling, including buffer marking.
Building contract — A contract covering the purchase, exchange, long lease, usufruct, leasing, rental or hire purchase, with or without option to buy, of land, buildings or other immovable property. It covers both existing buildings and buildings before completion provided that the candidate has obtained a valid building permit for it. It does not cover buildings designed in accordance with the specifications of the contracting authority that are covered by works contracts.
Bulk container — A containment system (including any liner or coating) intended for the carriage of solid substances which are in direct contact with the containment system. Packagings, intermediate bulk containers (IBCs), large packagings and tanks are not included. A bulk container is: – of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use, – specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more means of transport without intermediate reloading, – fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, – of a capacity of not less than 1.0 m3. Examples of bulk containers are containers, offshore bulk containers, skips, bulk bins, swap bodies, trough shaped containers, roller containers, load compartments of wagons. NOTE: This definition only applies to bulk containers meeting the requirements of Chapter 6.11.  "Closed bulk container" means a totally closed bulk container having a rigid roof, sidewalls, end walls and  floor (including hopper-type bottoms). The term includes bulk containers with an opening roof, side or end  wall that can be closed during carriage. Closed bulk containers may be equipped with openings to allow for  the exchange of vapours and gases with air and which under normal conditions of carriage prevent the release of solid contents as well as the penetration of rain and splash water; "Flexible bulk container" means a flexible container with a capacity not exceeding 15 m3 and includes liners  and attached handling devices and service equipment; "Sheeted bulk container" means an open top bulk container with rigid bottom (including hopper-type bottom), side and end walls and a non-rigid covering.
Bundle of cylinders — A pressure receptacle comprising an assembly of cylinders or cylinder shells that are fastened together and which are interconnected by a manifold and carried as a unit. The total water capacity shall not exceed 3 000 litres except that bundles intended for the carriage of toxic gases of Class 2 (groups starting with letter T according to 2.2.2.1.3) shall be limited to 1 000 litres water capacity.
Bunkers — It includes all dutiable petroleum products loaded aboard a vessel for consumption by that vessel.
Bus — A vehicle with more than nine seats including the driver's seat, constructed and equipped to carry passengers and their luggage. It may have one or two decks and may also draw a luggage trailer.
Business continuity — Capability of an organization to continue the delivery of products and services within acceptable time frames at predefined capacity during a disruption
Business continuity plan — Documented information that guides an organization to respond to a disruption and resume, recover and restore the delivery of products and services consistent with its business continuity objectives
Business unit — A business unit is a department or functional area within an organisation. It may concern differerent roles and purposes, e.g. human resources, production, long distance transport, logistics, shunting.
Business unit — Grouping of railway undertakings which make a joint train service offer (PRR transport service) which may be branded. As a rule they are formed into an economic interest grouping (GIE)
BV — Bouvet Island
BW — Botswana
BY — Belarus
By default value — Value of a parameter which is automatically allocated by the harmonised risk estimation method. A default value can be set either to ‘open’ or ‘closed’ parameters of the model.
BZ — Belize
C-ARS function — Application, Registration and data Storage (ARS) function (centralised)
C-type Train — Vehicles with [c]ommon brake control in accordance with [RD8] (separate control of dynamic and train air brake is not possible for ATO-OB). Typically, this term includes EMUs, DMUs, railbuses or electric railcars.
CA — Certification Authority
CA — Conformity Assessment
CA — Canada
CAA — Civil Aviation Authority
CAB — The space in the power unit or driving unit of the train containing the operating controls and providing shelter and seats for the driver or engine crew.
CAB — Conformity Assessment Body
CAB, ACTIVE — The active cab is the cab associated with an ERTMS/ETCS on- board equipment, from which the traction is controlled
Cab-radio — A RMR terminal installed on board the train capable of supporting voice and data applications.
Cabotage — It is road transport by a motor vehicle registered in a country performed on the national territory of another country. Cabotage data are reported by European Union (EU) Member States for hauliers registered in their country. Cabotage transport was gradually introduced in 1990 through authorization quotas (quantitative restrictions) and further liberalized in 1998 in the EU-15 (hauliers are allowed up to three cabotage operations within 7 days following an incoming international carriage). The cabotage regime was extended to the EFTA states (except Switzerland) following the creation of the EEA (European Economic Area). Cabotage between EU-15 and the Member States that joined the EU in 2004 was liberalized in May 2009 and in January 2012 for Bulgaria and Romania.
CAD — Computer-aided design
CADaS — Common Accident Data Set
Calculation pressure — A theoretical pressure at least equal to the test pressure which, according to the degree of danger exhibited by the substance being carried, may to a greater or lesser degree exceed the working pressure. It is used solely to determine the thickness of the walls of the shell, independently of any external or internal reinforcing device (see also "Discharge pressure", "Filling pressure", "Maximum working pressure (gauge pressure)" and "Test pressure"). NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7.
Calculations related to thermal capacity — Requirements concerning the calculations related to thermal capacity, both on wheels and brake equipment, e.g. scenarios and load conditions to be applied, sequence of brake applications to be considered, maximum line gradient, associated length and operating speed.
Cancellation of a path  (path cancellation) — When a planned train movement is cancelled by the applicant for a particular running day(s).
Cancellation of a train (train cancellation) — The 'cancellation of a train' concerns a train that is already running. As a train cancellation does not lead automatically to a (partial) path cancellation and vice-versa, it is important to distinguish in the 'train running phase' between a 'partial path cancellation' and a 'train cancellation': - train runs from A to B, ends its journey at B and does not continue from B to C at all:    * train is cancelled, path is partially cancelled - train runs from A to B, stops its journey at B and does not continue from B to C at all, but another train uses the path scheduled from B to C:    * only the train is cancelled - train runs from A to B, and then to E via D, instead of via C:    * path is partially cancelled (B – C – E), but train is not cancelled.
Candidate — An economic operator that has sought an invitation or has been invited to take part in a restricted procedure, a competitive procedure with negotiation, a competitive dialogue, an innovation partnership, a design contest or a negotiated procedure.
Cant — Difference in height, relative to the horizontal, of the two rails of one track at a particular location, measured at the centrelines of the heads of the rails.
Cant deficiency — Maximum   cant   deficiency   expressed   in millimetres  defined  as  difference  between the applied cant and a higher equilibrium cant the line has been designed for.
Cant deficiency — Difference between the applied cant and a higher equilibrium cant.
Cant Deficiency used for the basic SSP — Essential   information   for   drivers   of   trains   with   a   worse (lower)  tolerated  cant  deficiency  than  those  for  which  the ETCS   trackside   provides   SSP   (Static   Speed   Profiles)   in conjunction  with  1.1.1.3.2.14.1 According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
CAP — Common agricultural policy
Capacity — Narrow definition: the maximum number of trains which can be planned to move in both directions over a specified section of track in a 24-hour period. General definition: the totality of potential train paths that can be accommodated on a railway line or a network.
Capacity allocation — The process by which capacity is granted to a Railway Undertaking or to any other Applicant by theIM/AB/C-OSS; this capacity will later be used as actual train paths.
Capacity bandwidth — IMs offer a possibility to request a certain number of slots that are used for construction of a real train path.
Capacity enhancement plan — After the completion of a capacity analysis, a plan detailing measures to be carried out to increase the availability of capacity.
Capacity management — The capacity management is a business field in railways to ultimately balance capacity supply against capacity demand.
Capacity model — Capacity Model (X-36 to X-18 months) with Capacity Partitioning: The Capacity Model gives a more detailed definition of the demand forecast and requires the partitioning of capacity into volumes for passenger and freight traffic and Temporary Capacity Restrictions. Furthermore, it also allows a more detailed capacity partitioning based on product point of view (Annual Planning, Rolling Planning, Ad hoc and unplanned capacity (where available). Applicants have the possibility to give input into the Capacity Model by announcing their Capacity Needs and can provide their reaction on the proposed capacity partitioning.
Capacity Needs Announcements — Input from applicants to IMs for future needs of capacity.
Capacity of shell or shell compartment — For tanks, the total inner volume of the shell or shell compartment expressed in litres or cubic metres. When it is impossible to completely fill the shell or the shell compartment because of its shape or construction, this reduced capacity shall be used for the determination of the degree of filling and for the marking of the tank.
Capacity strategy — The capacity strategy is a strategical document for the long-term capacity planning of the IM for a dedicated line, a part of a network or an entire network. The major aim of the capacity strategy is to provide a first overview of available capacity on the infrastructure in the future and to set the general principles to be applied in the capacity planning (capacity model elaboration, TCR planning etc).
Capacity supply — Pre-constructed products for annual timetable, rolling planning requests, ad hoc requests and TCRs.
Capacity-enhancement plan — A measure or series of measures with a calendar for their implementation which aim to alleviate the capacity constraints which led to the declaration of an element of infrastructure as 'congested infrastructure'.
Capture — The insertion of a document into an official electronic repository by combining a unique identifier and metadata.
Car — Single non-articulated element of a railbound vehicle or unit.
Car carrier — Vehicle without traction capable of carrying passenger motor cars without their passengers and which is intended to be integrated in a passenger train.
CARE — Database on road accidents
CARE — Community database on Accidents on the Roads in Europe
Cargo transport unit — A road vehicle, a wagon, a container, a tank-container, a portable tank or an MEGC.
Carriage — The change of place of dangerous goods, including stops made necessary by transport conditions and including any period spent by the dangerous goods in wagons, tanks and containers made necessary by traffic conditions before, during and after the change of place. This definition also covers the intermediate temporary storage of dangerous goods in order to change the mode or means of transport (transshipment). This shall apply, provided that transport documents showing the place of dispatch and the place of reception are presented on request and provided that packages and tanks are not opened during intermediate storage, except to be checked by the competent authorities.
Carriage in bulk — The carriage of unpackaged solids or articles in wagons, containers or bulk containers. The term does not apply to packaged goods nor to substances carried in tanks.
Carriage or coach — A railway vehicle, not provided with a means of traction, which is intended to carry passengers; the term includes a luggage wagon which is intended to be carried in a passenger train.
Carrier — The contractual railway undertaking with whom the passenger has concluded a transport contract or a series of successive railway undertakings which are liable on the basis of such a contract.
Carrier — The enterprise which carries out the transport operation with or without a transport contract.
Carrier — An enterprise which carries out a transport operation pursuant to a contract of carriage.
Carrier — The contractual railway undertaking with whom the passenger has concluded a transport contract or a series of successive railway undertakings which are liable on the basis of such a contract. (from the TAP glossary)
Carrier — Contractual carrier with whom the passenger has concluded the contract of carriage pursuant to the CIV Uniform Rules, or a successive carrier who is liable on the basis of that contract.
Carrier — The person who carries persons or goods by rail in international traffic under the CIV Uniform Rules or the CIM Uniform Rules and who is licensed in accordance with the laws and prescriptions relating to licensing and recognition of licenses in force in the State in which the person undertakes this activity.
Carrier — Carrier Contractual carrier or successive carrier
Carrier — OTIF definition: 'the person who carries persons or goods by rail in international traffic under the CIV Uniform Rules or the CIM Uniform Rules and who is licensed in accordance with the laws and prescriptions relating to licensing and recognition of licenses in force in the State in which the person undertakes this activity.' ['person' here meaning the legal entity]                                                                                General definition: organisation that undertakes transportation of goods by sea, surface or air. 'Contracting Carrier' means a person or company who as a principle makes an agreement for carriage with a passenger or the consignor. 'Actual Carrier' means a person or company other than the contracting carrier, who, by virtue of authority from the contracting carrier, performs the whole or part of the carriage.
Carrier — The contractual carrier with whom the passenger has concluded the contract of carriage pursuant to these Uniform Rules, or a successive carrier who is liable on the basis of this contract.
Carrier, Joint — A carrier linked by a cooperation agreement to one or more other carriers for the operation of a transport service
Carrier, Sole — A carrier that operates a transport service independently of other carriers
Carryover — Exception to the principle of annuality allowing for appropriations that could not be used in a given budget year to be exceptionally carried over, under very strict conditions, for use during the following year.
CAST — Commercial Aviation Safety Team
Casuality — Any person killed or injured as a result of an injury accident, excluding attempted suicides.
Catastrophic accident — An accident typically affecting a large number of people and resulting in multiple fatalities.
Catastrophic rupture — A catastrophic rupture is the complete failure of the equipment leading to the complete and instantaneous release of the substance. A BLEVE is also a catastrophic rupture in particular operating conditions. Depending on the circumstances, the catastrophic rupture can lead to overpressure generation and missiles ejection.
Categories of goods carried by rail — Goods in transport may be classified according to type. Examples of classification schemes are NST 2007 (Standard Goods Nomenclature for Transport Statistics) that replaces the CSTE nomenclature (Commodity Classification for Transport Statistics in Europe – UNECE) and the NST/R nomenclature (Standard Goods Nomenclature for Transport Statistics/revised – Eurostat).
Category of line — Classification  of  a  line  according  to  the  TSI  INF
Category of person in railway accident statistics — •	Rail passenger: Any person, excluding members of the train crew, who makes a trip by rail. For accident statistics, passengers trying to embark/disembark onto/from a moving train are included. •	Employees or contractor: Any person whose employment is in connection with a railway and is at work on duty at the time of the accident. It includes the crew of the train and persons handling rolling stock and infrastructure installations. •	Level crossing user: Persons using a level crossing to cross the railway line by any mean of transportation or by foot. •	Trespasser (Unauthorised persons on railway premises): Any persons present in railway premises where such presence is forbidden, with the exception of level crossing users. •	Others: –	Other person at platform: means any person at a railway platform who is not defined as “passenger”, “employee or contractor”, “level crossing user”, “other person not at a platform” or “trespasser”. –	Other person not at platform: means any person not at a railway platform who is not defined as “passenger”, “employee or contractor”, “level crossing user”, “other person at a platform” or “trespasser”.
Category of vehicle — The scope of ECM activities indicated in the application forms ( Annex III of the Regulation (EU) 2019/779). The possible categories are: freight wagons, locomotives, multiples units, passenger carriages, high speed vehicles, On Track Machines (OTM) and must be specified in case of other
Category of vehicles — The scope of ECM activities indicated in the application forms ( Annex III of the Regulation (EU)2019/779). The possible categories are: freight wagons, locomotives, multiples units, passenger carriages, high speed vehicles, On Track Machines (OTM) and must be specified in case of other.
Catenary — In overhead electrification equipment, the secondary wire that supports the contact (live) wire, and helps to keep the tension necessary for pantographs to draw current from it.
Causal Factor — Any action, omission, event or condition, or a combination thereof that if corrected, eliminated, or avoided would have prevented the occurrence, in all likelihood.
Causes — Actions, omissions, events or conditions, or a combination thereof, which led to an accident or incident.
Causes — Actions, omissions, events or conditions, or a combination thereof, which led to the accident or incident.
CBSS — Council of the Baltic Sea States
CBTC — Communication Based Train Control
cc — cubic centimetre
CC — Cocos (Keeling) Islands (the)
CC — Abbreviation in B.5 for “Couchette”
CCAMLR — Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
CCC — 1. Customs Co-operation Council 2. Consumers’ Consultative Council
CCCN — Customs Co-operation Council Nomenclature
CCITT — Consultative Committee on Innovation and Technology Transfer
CCM — Change Control Management
CCM — Change Control Management - the process by which the TAP TSI Regulation and its related documents can be modified during their life
CCS — Command Control and Signalling (TSI)
CCS — Control-Command and Signalling
CCS — Command Control and Signalling
CCS — Control Command and Signalling
CCT — Common Customs Tariff
CCTV — Closed Circuit Television
CC_A — Capacity category A
CC_B — Capacity category B
CC_C — Capacity category C
CD — Congo (the Democratic Republic of the)
CD-ROM — Compact disc read-only memory
CE — As in ‘CE marking’: European Community conformity marking
CE marking — A marking by which the manufacturer indicates that the product is in conformity with the applicable requirements set out in Community harmonisation legislation providing for its affixing.
CE marking — A marking by which the manufacturer indicates that the radio equipment is in conformity with the applicable requirements set out in Union harmonisation legislation providing for its affixing.
CEBD — Compiled energy billing data
CECA — FR: Communauté européenne du charbon et de l’acier (in EN: ECSC)
CECAF — Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic
Cedefop — European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (FR: Centre européen pour le développement de la formation professionnelle)
Cedex — Courrier d’entreprise à distribution exceptionnelle (in FR addresses)
CEECs — Central and east(ern) European countries
CEIES — Advisory Committee on Statistical Information in the Economic and Social Spheres (FR: Comité consultatif européen de l’information statistique dans les domaines économique et social)
Ceiling — Limits of expenditure or revenue fixed by law or by agreement , such as in the own resources decision or in the multiannual financial framework. The latter defines an annual ceiling for each expenditure  heading in commitment appropriations and an annual global ceiling for payment appropriations
CELEX — Interinstitutional computerised documentation system for Community law (Communitatis Europaeae Lex) (replaced by EUR-Lex)
CEMT — Conference Européenne des Ministres des Transports (acronym used for the navigability class of inland waterways)
CEN — European Committee for Standardisation
CEN — European Committee for Standardization. www.cen.eu
CEN — European Committee for Standardisation (Comité Européen de Normalisation)
CEN — Comité Européen de Normalisation
CEN — European Committee for Standardization
CEN — European Committee for Standardisation (FR: Comité européen de normalisation)
CENELEC — European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation
CENELEC — European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization www.cenelec.eu
CENELEC — European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (Comité Européen de Normalisation Electrotechnique)
CENELEC — European Committee  for Electrotechnical Standardisation
CENELEC — European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation (FR: Comité européen de normalisation électrotechnique)
Central purchasing body — A contracting authority providing centralised purchasing activities and, where applicable, ancillary purchasing activities.
CEPOL — European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Training (until 30.6.2016: ‘European Police College’)
CEPT — European  Conference   of  Postal   and  Telecommunications   Administrations (Conférence     européenne     des     administrations     des     postes     et     des télécommunications)
CEPT — European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (FR: Conférence européenne des administrations des postes et des télécommunications)
CER — Community of European Railways
CER — The Community of European Railway and infrastructure companies
CER — Community of European Railways and Infrastructure Companies
CERD — European Research and Development Committee (FR: Comité européen de la recherche et du développement)
CERN — European Organisation for Nuclear Research (FR: Organisation européenne pour la recherche nucléaire)
CERT-EU — It is the Computer Emergency Response Team for the EU institutions and agencies. Its mission is to support the European Institutions to protect themselves against intentional and malicious attacks that would hamper the integrity of their IT assets and harm the interests of the EU. The scope of CERT-EU's activities covers prevention, detection, response and recovery.
Certificate — The harmonised complementary certificate indicating the infrastructure on which the holder is autho- rised to drive and the rolling stock which the holder is autho- rised to drive.
Certificate — In the meaning of B.7 a certificate is an identifier, referred to a specific ticket and generated by the TCO when the distributor sends a certificate request message (CMC and CKC) or by the distributor itself (DST)
Certificate for electronic seal — An electronic attestation that links electronic seal validation data to a legal person and confirms the name of that person.
Certificate for electronic signature — An electronic attestation which links electronic signature validation data to a natural person and confirms at least the name or the pseudonym of that person.
Certificate for website authentication — An attestation that makes it possible to authenticate a website and links the website to the natural or legal person to whom the certificate is issued.
Certificate of Operation — The attestation issued by the competent authority of an admission to operation, including the conditions of the admission.
Certificate of verification — The certificate delivered for a subsystem either by the notified body or by the designated body regarding the verification of conformity respectively with relevant TSIs or with relevant national rules from the design stage to the acceptance stage before the subsystem is placed on the market or in service and which covers verification of the interfaces of the subsystem in question with the system into which it is incorporated.
Certificate of Verification — The attestation issued by an assessing entity that verification has been carried out with a positive result.
Certification Body — A body, responsible for the certification of entities in charge of maintenance or for certification of the entity or organisation that fulfil maintenance functions referred to in points (b), (c) or (d) of Article 14(3) of Directive (EU) 798/2016, or parts of those functions; it is accredited or recognised or be a national safety authority and in his role is called to be compliant with the general criteria and principles set out in Annex I of ECM Regulation.
Certification body — Responsible for the certification of entities in charge of maintenance or for certifi cation of the  entity  or  organisation  that  fulfil  maintenance  functions  referred  to  in  points  (b),  (c)  or  (d)  of  Article 14(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/798, or parts of those functions.
Certification body — A certification body as defined in Article 3 of Regulation (EU) No 445/2011.
Certification Committee — A person or group of persons assigned by the certification body to make a certification decision based on all information related to the assessment, its review and any other relevant information. The certification committee shall be free from any commercial, financial and other pressures that might influence decisions. It has not been involved in the process of assessment of item under certification.
Certification committee — A person or group of persons assigned by the certification body to make a certification decision based on all information related to the assessment, its review and any other relevant information. The certification committee shall be free from any commercial, financial and other pressures that might influence decisions. It has not been involved in the process of assessment of item under certification.
Certification decision — Granting, continuing, expanding the scope of, reducing the scope of, suspending, restoring, withdrawing or refusing certification.
Certification decision — Granting, continuing, expanding the scope of, and reducing the scope of, suspending, restoring, withdrawing or refusing certification.
Certification framework — The certification framework is the set of TSIs (i.e. this TSI, the TSI NOI and the TSI PRM) applicable at the time of issuing the EC type or design examination certificate. It is the initial assessment framework amended with the revisions of TSIs that came into force during the design phase.
Certification framework — The certification framework is the set of TSIs (this TSI and the TSI NOI) applicable at the time of issuing the EC type or design examination certificate. It is the initial assessment framework amended with the revisions of TSIs that came into force during the design phase.
Certification framework for CCS On-Board Subsystem — It is the CCS TSI applicable at the time of issuing the EC type or design examination certificate. It is the initial assessment framework amended with the revisions of TSIs that came into force during the design phase, and applicable as per the transition regime described in Appendix B.
Certification scheme — Certification system related to specified products, to which the same specified requirements, specific rules and procedures apply.
Certification scheme owner — Individual or organisation which is responsible for developing and maintaining a certification scheme.  For certifications of ECM or outsourced maintenance functions according to the ECM Regulation, ERA is the scheme owner.
Certification scheme owner — Individual or organisation, which is responsible for developing and maintaining a certification scheme.
Certification system — Rules, procedures and management for carrying out certification. ECM Regulation is the mandatory document for vehicle maintenance certification system, both, for ECM certification and certification of outsourced maintenance functions.
Certification system — Rules, procedures, and management for carrying out certification. ECM Regulation is the mandatory criteria document for vehicle maintenance certification systems both for ECM certification and outsourced maintenance functions.
CES — Conditional Emergency Stop
CESE — Comité économique et social européen (EN: EESC)
CF — Central African Republic (the)
CF — Correction factor (1 = no correction)
CFCA — (See EFCA)
CFCs — Chlorofluorocarbons
CFP — Common fisheries policy
CFPE — Community financing projects for the environment
CFR — Căile Ferate Române – Romanian Railways
CFSP — Common foreign and security policy
CG — Congo (the)
CGS — The Compressed Gas Association (CGA, 14501 George Carter Way, Suite 103, Chantilly VA 20151, United States of America).
CH — Switzerland
Change of messages and/or the structure of the reference file — The messages are maintained within the domain. Any involved stakeholder (RU, IM, AB, SM) can put the request for a change (new, alteration, deletion of a message) to the technical services management group. It has to consult the relevant expert working groups on the need of that change with 2 months notice. The working group can reject, ask for clarifications and give recommendations, eventually following an impact analysis within a given timeframe. If approved, a migration strategy has to be developed as well. On recommendation of the working groups the entity asks the Supervisory Board for confirmation. The entity publishes the changed messages and the migration plan soon after that confirmation and puts it into the ERA CCM according to chapter 7 of both TAP and TAF TSI. The message can be used according to that migration plan or on bilateral agreement. For: • optional change to existing specifications – information to Supervisory Board is sufficient • mandatory change to existing specifications and new specifications: Any stakeholder gives a request with justification for the change to the entity. The entity, together with the relevant SMG, creates a workplan. This plan is also used to inform the stakeholders in order to allow experts to be sent to working groups. Work is done by the WG following the approval of the workplan by the Supervisory Board. The result of the WG needs to be approved by the SB as well and is published subsequently. Change of message can only be once per year on a given date. Migration plan needs to allow companies to implement it (communication of change at least 1 year before usage). A migration plan should be proposed by the WG, including a minimum period in which the change is optional and a time from which the change is mandatory. The WG of the TAF and TAP governance entity should take into account both business and IT needs.
Channel — The method (such as ticket office machine, on-train media, public web services, telesales, mobile ticketing) by which a service (information, ticket sale, ticket refund, response to complaints, etc.) is provided to the passenger by a railway undertaking
Character of operation — The characterisation of operation by its scope, including infrastructure design and construction, infrastructure maintenance, traffic planning, traffic management and control, and by the use of the railway infrastructure, including conventional and/or high speed lines, transport of passengers and/or goods
Characteristics of rescue coupling — Requirements to coupling adapters which make different coupling systems compatible; in normal and degraded mode (e.g. rescue coupler).
Charging Information System (CIS) — CIS is a European infrastructure charging information system; this IT tool is run by RailNetEurope. CIS provides price estimates on charges related to the use of the European rail network.
Check — The entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) may under its responsibility substitute a component by another one utilising the same function and performance in accordance with the relevant TSI requirements
Check — The verification of a specific aspect of a revenue or expenditure operation.
Chemical and particulate emission — Other emissions/spills from the vehicle like oil and grease leakage, flange lubricant, fuel etc.
CI — Common Interface
CI — Côte d'Ivoire
CIF — Cost, insurance and freight (Incoterms 2010)
CIM — The Uniform Rules Concerning the Contract of International Carriage of Goods by Rail (Appendix B to the Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail (COTIF)), as amended.
CIM — Uniform Rules concerning Contract of International Carriage of Goods by  Rail, Appendix B to the Convention concerning International Carriage by  Rail (COTIF 1999)
CIM Consignment Note Manual (GLV-CIM) — CIT publication containing the instructions for the use of the CIM consignment note; it is also available on the web-site www.cit-rail.org
CIREA — Centre for Information, Discussion and Exchange on Asylum (within the General Secretariat of the Council)
CIS — Commonwealth of Independent States (see Annex A3)
CIT — International Rail Transport Committee [Comité international des transports ferroviaires]
CIT — International Rail Transport Committee, an association with legal personality constituted under Swiss law and with its headquarters in Bern. The CIT’s principal objectives are the implementation and consistent application of the law of international carriage by rail governed by COTIF
CITES — Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
City — See Metastation
CIV — Uniform Rules Uniform Rules concerning the Contract of International Carriage of Passengers by Rail
CJ — Court of Justice
CK — Cook Islands (the)
CKC — Carrier Keeps Certificate - one of the possible methods for implementation of home printing according to B.7
CL — Chile
Class — In object-oriented programming, a class is a construct that is used as a blueprint to create instances of itself – referred to as class instances, class objects, instance objects or simply objects. A class usually represents a noun, such as a person, place or thing, or something nominalised
Class — Class(es) of dangerous goods as defined in RID/ADR/ADN chapter 2.
Class B systems — ‘Class B systems’ as defined in point 3 of Annex II to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1695.
Class diagram — In the Unified Modeling Language (UML) a class diagram is a type of static structure diagram that describes the structure of a system by showing the system's classes, their attributes, operations (or methods), and the relationships among the classes
Classic standard — One of the RCT2 layouts defined in TD B.6, alternative to the compressed standard
Classification — The attribution given by one Member State to another Member State’s national rule covering a particular parameter according to one of the three groups A, B or C, which are defined in Section 2 of Annex VII to Directive 2008/57/EC.
CLEAR (a signal) — To change a signal aspect from its most restrictive aspect to a less restrictive aspect.
Clearways — Clearance (width and height) of space inside in the vehicle for the passenger to have free access to all facilities (also related to passengers with reduced mobility).
Closed bulk container — A totally closed bulk container having a rigid roof, sidewalls, end walls and floor (including hopper-type bottoms). The term includes bulk containers with an opening roof, side or end wall that can be closed during carriage. Closed bulk containers may be equipped with openings to allow for the exchange of vapours and gases with air and which under normal conditions of carriage prevent the release of solid contents as well as the penetration of rain and splash water.
Closed bulk container — See "Bulk container"
Closed container — See "Container"
Closed container — A totally enclosed container having a rigid roof, rigid side walls, rigid end walls and a floor. The term includes containers with an opening roof where the roof can be closed during transport.
Closed cryogenic receptacle — A thermally insulated pressure receptacle for refrigereted liquefied gases of a water capacity of not more than 1000 litres.
Closed system — A ticket controlling system with on-line connection on board of a train, giving the possibility to detect if a ticket is used twice
Closed wagon — A wagon with fixed or movable sides or roof.
Closure — A device which closes an opening in a receptacle.  NOTE: For pressure receptacles, closures are, for example, valves, pressure lief devices, pressure gauges or level indicators.
Cloud computing service — A digital service that enables on-demand administration and broad remote access to a scalable and elastic pool of shareable computing resources, including where such resources are distributed across several locations.
CLRAE — Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe
Club good — A good that can be consumed only by a limited number of users (club members), as opposed to a public good (consumable by everyone) or one from whose consump
Cm — Centimetre
CM — Cameroon
CMC — Carrier Makes Certificate - one of the possible methods for implementation of home printing according to B.7
CMEA — Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Comecon)
CMR — The Convention on the Contract for the International Carriage of Goods by Road (Geneva, 19 May 1956), as amended.
CN — China
CN — Combined Nomenclature
CN-code — 8-digit Code list for products used by customers.
CNG — Compressed Natural Gas
CO — ATO Configuration
CO — Colombia
Coach — Vehicle without traction in a fixed or variable formation capable of carrying passengers (by extension, requirements specified to apply to coaches in this TSI are deemed to apply also to restaurant cars, sleeping cars, couchettes cars, etc.).
Coach group — Group of one or more coaches that do not run for the whole route of a train. They can be pulled by a single train but only for part of its route, or they can be pulled by one train for part of their route and then be disconnected from that train and coupled to another
Coach ID — The unique identification number of a coach
Coach or Carriage or Passenger car — Railway vehicle for carrying passengers.
Cobol — Common business-oriented language
Code allocation — Codes are divided into three categories: • A for functional codes that have no impact on the message exchange. It represents functional information that is sent through the messages for functional use within the business processes (e.g. planning of a short term train) • B for process codes that have a relevance for the way applications deal with the message (e.g. the status of the message new, update, delete) • C for external codes that are used within the business processes but are controlled by different domains (e.g. Retail, UN Codes) that have their own governance processes. A reference to the controlling body is given. Processes for the maintenance of codes • Category A: • These codes are maintained within the domain of RUs, IMs and SMs. Any involved stakeholder (e.g. RU, IM, AB) can put the request for a change (new, alteration, deletion) to the technical services management group in the governance entity. The entity can consult relevant expert working groups on the need of that change within 2 months. The entity attributes a code value and informs the Supervisory Board. The entity publishes the code soon after. • Category B: • These codes are maintained within the domain. Any involved stakeholder (RU, IM, AB) can put the request for a change (new, alteration, deletion) to the technical services management group which has to consult relevant expert working groups on the need of that change within 2 months notice. The working group can reject, ask for clarifications and give a recommendation, eventually following an impact analysis. If approved, a migration strategy has to be developed as well. On recommendation of the working groups the service management group attributes a code value and recommends approval from the Supervisory Board. The entity publishes the code and the migration plan soon after that confirmation. The code can be used according to that migration plan or bilateral agreements. • Category C -> see respective controlling body. The entity publishes these codes  as well for information as soon as they are known. A delay notice until the use of these codes can be agreed. The ERA TAF and/or TAP CCM WP will be informed on the changes of the codes.
Code of practice — A written set of rules that, when correctly applied, can be used to control one or more specific hazards.
Codest — Committee for the European Development of Science and Technology (FR: Comité de développement européen de la science et de la technologie)
COGECA — General Confederation of Agricultural Cooperatives in the European Union (formerly ‘General Committee for Agricultural Cooperation in the EC’)
Collapse of the roof — The collapse of the roof may be due to a decrease of the internal pressure in the vessel, leading to the collapse of the mobile roof under the effect of atmospheric pressure. The collapse of the roof is especially associated with atmospheric storage.
Collective entry — An entry for a defined group of substances or articles (see 2.1.1.2, B, C and D).
Collective risk — A measure of the risk posed to a specific group of persons, for examples passengers, staff, inhabitants…
Collision — •	Collision of two or more rail vehicles Any (front to front, front to end or a side) impact between a part of a train and a part of another train or rail vehicle, or with shunting rolling stock. •	Collision of rail vehicle with obstacle within the clearance gauge An impact between a part of a train and objects fixed or temporarily present on or near the track (except at level crossings if lost by a crossing vehicle or user), including impacts with overhead contact lines
Collision of train with obstacle within the clearance gauge — A collision between a part of a train and objects fixed or temporarily present on or near the track (except at level crossings if lost by a crossing vehicle or user), including collision with overhead contact lines.
Collision of train with rail vehicle — A front to front, front to end or a side collision between a part of a train and a part of another train or rail vehicle, or with shunting rolling stock.
Colour region — Boundary values of x, y chromaticity coordinates of the CIE 2° standard colorimetric observer and luminance factor or luminance for the named colour.
Combination packaging — A combination of packagings for carriage purposes, consisting of one or more inner packagings secured in an outer packaging in accordance with 4.1.1.5. NOTE: The term "inner packaging" used for combination packagings shall not be confused with the term "inner receptacle" used for composite packagings.
Combination sign — Sign that combines a safety sign and one or more associated supplementary signs on the same rectangular carrier.
Combined road-rail transport or Combined Transport — Intermodal transport where the major part of the European journey is by rail and any initial and/or final legs carried out by road are as short as possible.
Combined transport — The carriage of goods by heavy goods vehicles or loading units which complete part of their journey by rail as well as begin and/or end the journey by road.
Combined Transport — A subcategory of Intermodal Freight Transport as defined in the “Glossary for transport statistics” where the longest of the  successive modes of transport is rail and of which the movement of empty intermodal transport units is considered to be part.
Combined transport — Intermodal transport of intermodal transport units when the major part of  the journey is made by rail, by inland waterway or sea but the initial  and/or terminal journeys are made by another mode of transport
Combined transport — Intermodal transport where the major part of the European journey is by rail, inland waterways or sea and any initial and/or final legs carried out by road are as short as possible.
Combined transport — The transport of goods between Member States where the lorry, trailer, semi-trailer, with or without tractor unit, swap body or container of 20 feet or more uses the road on the initial or final leg of the journey and, on the other leg, rail or inland waterway or maritime services where this section exceeds 100 km as the crow flies and make the initial or final road transport leg of the journey; - between the point where the goods are loaded and the nearest suitable rail loading station for the initial leg, and between the nearest suitable rail unloading station and the point where the goods are unloaded for the final leg, or - within a radius not exceeding 150 km as the crow flies from the inland waterway port or seaport of loading or unloading.
Combined Transport Profile (CTP) — It is attributed to a section of line. It represents a completely closed envelope with specified shape and dimensions which a given intermodal loading unit, in loaded position on a suitable codified wagon, shall not encroach upon at any time. It is a combination of the wagon compatibility code (WCC) and the Combined Transport Profile number (CTP no.) (e.g. C45, P400).
Combined Transport Train — As defined in the TSI OPE, Appendix J, a combined transport train is a freight train composed completely or partly of freight wagons loaded with intermodal loading unit(s) (e.g. swap bodies, semi-trailers, containers, roller units).
Combined transport train — A Combined Transport train is a freight train composed completely or partly of freight wagons loaded with intermodal loading unit(s) (e.g. swap bodies, semi-trailers, containers, roller units).
Comecon — Council for Mutual Economic Assistance
Comedi — Commerce electronic data interchange
Comext — Database of external trade statistics
Commercial service — Denotes the services and commercial conditions offered by an RU to keepers and other RUs. These services comprise, in particular, the routes served, the products or goods accepted in the trains, the different ways of carriage and the prices of the services provided.
Commission — The European Commission
Commission department — Any Commission Directorate-General or service, or any Cabinet of a Member of the Commission.
Commission rate — The remuneration earned by a retailer for the sale of a rail product, expressed in percentage of the product value
Commission Security Authority — It refers to the role laid down in Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/444.
Commissioning — Phase before handover (3.1.2.8) to a customer, in which a product is tested under operational conditions to verify that it functions according to its specifications Note 1 to entry: The product is then prepared to start operation.
Commitment appropriations — Total cost of legal obligations (contracts, grant agreements/decisions) that could be signed in the current financial year
Committed Amount — Amount reserved through a Commission decision or contract conclusion for future legal obligations (contracts, grant agreements/decisions)
Committee of Technical Experts — The Committee provided for in Article 13 § 1, f) of the Convention.
Committee on Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE) — Committee of the European Parliament, whose areas of responsibility relate to industry, information technology, and telecommunications. It also coordinates European space policy and therefore has ties with the European Space Agency.
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety (ENVI) — Committee of the European Parliament which deals with environmental policy and environmental protection measures, public health and food safety measures.
Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) — Committee of the European Parliament responsible for the legislative provisions of the EU concerning the free movement of goods, services and professionals, customs policy, harmonisation and consumer protection.
Committee on Transport and Tourism (TRAN) — The Committee on Transport and Tourism is a Committee of the European Parliament which deals with the policy of the EU in the fields of rail and road transport, inland and maritime shipping and aviation, traffic regulations, the development of the TEN-T network, road safety and the relations with international transport organisations.
Common characteristics subset — A subset of items shared by sections of lines and/or operational points.’
Common crossing — Arrangement ensuring intersection of two opposite running edges of turnouts or diamond crossings and having one crossing vee and two wing rails.
Common safety methods (CSMs) — The methods describing the assessment of safety levels and achievement of safety targets and compliance with other safety requirements.
Common safety targets (CSTs) — The minimum safety levels that are to be reached by the system as a whole, and where feasible, by different parts of the Union rail system (such as the conventional rail system, the high-speed rail system, long railway tunnels or lines solely used for freight transport).
Common-Mode Fault — Fault common to items which are intended to be independent.
Communication — Includes languages, display of text, Braille, tactile communication, large print, accessible multimedia as well as written, audio, plain-language, human-reader and augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats of communication, including accessible information and communication technology.
Communication and consultation — Continual and interactive processes that an organisation conducts to provide, share or obtain information, and to engage in dialogue with stakeholders regarding the management of risk.
Communication and information system (CIS) — Any system enabling the handling of information in electronic form, including all assets required for its operation, as well as infrastructure, organisation, personnel and information resources. This definition includes business applications, shared IT services, outsourced systems, and end-user devices.
Community harmonisation legislation — Any Community legislation harmonising the conditions for the marketing of products.
Compartment — Passenger area or staff area, which cannot be used as a through route for passengers or staff respectively.
Compatibility of rolling stock with CCS Trackside — Other compatibility requirements than EMC for Rolling Stock with track-side CCS train detection systems, for EMC see 8.4.2 (EMC between the vehicle and the railway system).
Compatibility with fixed installations of CCS — Compatibility with fixed installations of CCS, see § 3.1.10 of the document (ERA/ERTMS/033281): Interfaces between CCS trackside and other subsystems.
Competence — The qualification and experience necessary to safely and reliably undertake the task being performed. Experience may be gained as part of the training process.
Competence — The proven ability to use knowledge, skills and personal, social and/or methodological abilities, in work or study situations and in professional and personal development
Competence — Ability to apply knowledge and skills to achieve intended results (ISO 9000).
Competence management — A structured approach to ensure that employees have the competences required in order to achieve the organisation's objectives safely, effectively and efficiently in all circumstances.
Competent authority — The authority or authorities or any other body or bodies designated as such in each State and in each specific case in accordance with domestic law.
Competent authority — The safety authority referred to in Article 16 of Directive 2004/49/EC.
Competent authority — Any public authority or group of public authorities of a Member State or Member States which has the power to intervene in public passenger transport in a given geographical area or any body vested with such authority.
Competent authority — Any public authority in a Member State competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security.
Competent authority — The competent authority as defined in Article 3 of Directive 2007/59/EC or any other body appointed by the Member State or entrusted with the task of recognition of training centres and of examiners by the competent authority through delegation.
Competent local authority — Any competent authority whose geographical area of competence is not national.
Competent National Authority — The national authority responsible for technical admission in accordance with the laws and regulations in force in each country.
Competitive rail transport prices — Rail transport prices shall be considered competitive if the average rail transport prices in Switzerland are no higher than the road transport costs, as defined in Annex 9, for a similar route.
Compiled energy billing data (CEBD) — Dataset compiled by the Data Handling System (DHS) suitable for energy billing
Complementary certificate for train driver — See certificate
Compliance assurance — For radioactive material,  a systematic programme of measures applied by a competent authority which is aimed at ensuring that the requirements of RID are met in practice.
Compliance of structures with the High Speed Load Model (HSLM) — For sections of  line with a maximum permitted speed of 200 km/h or more. Information  regarding  the  procedure  to be used to perform the dynamic compatibility check
Compliance of the tunnel with TSI INF — Compliance  of  the  tunnel  with  TSI  INF  at  the  maximum permitted  speed
Component — A tangible part of the subsystem.
Component — Uniquely identifiable product that is considered indivisible for particular planning or control purpose and/or which cannot be disassembled without it being destroyed. Note 1 to entry: A component for one organizational group may be the final assembly of another group, e.g. an electric motor.
Composite — Combination of materials that are generally recognized in building construction as discrete entities. EXAMPLE:Coated or laminated materials.
Composite IBC with plastics inner receptacle — An IBC comprising structural equipment in the form of a rigid outer casing encasing a plastics inner receptacle together with any service or other structuralequipment. It is so constructed that the inner receptacle and outer casing once assembled form, and are used as, an integrated single unit to be filled, stored, transported or emptied as such. NOTE: "Plastics material", when used in connection with inner receptacles for composite IBCs, is taken to include other polymeric materials such as rubber.
Composite packaging — A packaging consisting of an outer packaging and an inner receptacle so constructed that the inner receptacle and the outer packaging form an integral packaging. Once assembled it remains thereafter an integrated single unit; it is filled, stored, carried and emptied as such. NOTE: The term "inner receptacle" used for composite packagings shall not be confused with the term "inner packaging" used for combination packagings. For example, the inner of a 6HA1 composite packaging (plastics material) is such an inner receptacle since it is normally not designed to perform a containment function without its outer packaging and is not therefore an inner packaging. Where a material is mentioned in brackets after the term "composite packaging", it refers to the inner receptacle.
Comprehensive network — The transport infrastructure identified in accordance with Chapter II of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) — A compressed gas composed of natural gas with a high methane content assigned to UN No. 1971.
Compressed standard — One of the RCT2 layouts defined in TD B.6, alternative to the classic standard
Concession contract — A contract for pecuniary interest concluded in writing between one or more economic operators and one or more contracting authorities within the meaning of Articles 174 and 178, in order to entrust the execution of works or the provision and management of services to an economic operator (the ‘concession’), and where: (a) the remuneration consists either solely in the right to exploit the works or services or in that right together with payment; (b) the award of the concession contract involves the transfer to the concessionaire of an operating risk in exploiting those works or services encompassing demand risk or supply risk, or both. The concessionaire shall be deemed to assume an operating risk where, under normal operating conditions, there is no guarantee of recouping the investments made or the costs incurred in operating the works or the services concerned.
Conciliation — Negotiation period of maximum 21 calendar days to find a compromise in case the positions of the Council and the Parliament on the draft EU budget differ. The European Commission participates and takes initiatives to reconcile the diverging position
Conditional level transition order — A Conditional Level Transition Order is a spot check of the on- board operated level. This may cause a level transition if the ERTMS/ETCS on-board does not operate one of the allowed levels.
Conditioned vehicle — Any vehicle whose fixed or movable superstructures are specially equipped for the carriage of goods at controlled temperatures and whose side walls, inclusive of insulation, are each at least 45 mm thick.
Conditions applying in regards to regenerative braking — Name   and/or   reference   of   the   document   specifying   the conditions  applying  in  regards  to  regenerative  braking
Conditions for use of reflective plates — Details  of  any  conditions  for  using  the  reflective  plates  on freight  corridors.  Specific  case  for  Portugal  and  Spain  until 1.1.2025  and  Belgium  and  France  until  1.1.2026
Conditions, maintenance — The maintenance criteria adopted for maintaining the system referred to its Operating Conditions.
Conditions, operating — The rated performance required of the system.
Conditions, system — The conditions under which the system is called to operate, including: ·    environmental conditions; ·    operating conditions; ·    maintenance conditions.
Confidential data — Data which allow statistical units to be identified, either directly or indirectly, thereby disclosing individual information. To determine whether a statistical unit is identifiable, account shall be taken of all relevant means that might reasonably be used by a third party to identify the statistical unit.
Configuration — The structuring and interconnecting of the hardware and software of a system for its intended application.
Configuration audit — Audit performed in accordance with documented information to determine whether a product or service conforms to its requirements and configuration information (3.1.1.5)
Configuration baseline — Approved configuration information (3.1.1.5) that establishes the characteristics of a product or a service at a point in time that serves as reference for activities throughout the life cycle of the product or service
Configuration information — Requirements for product or service design, realization, verification (3.1.3.12), operation and support
Configuration management — A systematic organisational, technical and administrative process put in place throughout the lifecycle of a vehicle and/or vehicle type to ensure that the consistency of the documentation and the traceability of the changes are established and maintained so that: (a)  requirements from relevant Union law and national rules are met; (b)  changes are controlled and documented either in the technical files or in the file accompanying the issued authorisation; (c) information and data is kept current and accurate; (d) relevant parties are informed of changes, as required.
Configuration management — A systematic organisational, technical and administrative process put in place throughout the lifecycle of a CCS subsystem to ensure that the consistency of the documentation and the traceability of the changes are established and maintained so that: (a) requirements from relevant Union law and national rules are met; (b) changes are controlled and documented either in the technical files or in the file accompanying the issued authorisation; (c) information and data is kept current and accurate; (d) relevant parties are informed of changes, as required.
Configuration Management — A discipline applying technical and administrative direction and surveillance to identify and document the functional and physical characteristics of a configuration item, control change to those characteristics, record and report change processing and implementation status and verify compliance with specified requirements. (3)
Configuration status accounting — Formalized recording and reporting of configuration information (3.1.1.5), the status of proposed changes and the status of the implementation of approved changes
Confinement system — For the carriage of radioactive material, means the assembly of fissile material and packaging components specified by the designer and agreed to by the competent authority as intended to preserve criticality safety.
Conflicting applications / customer requests for train paths — The situation where, after co-ordination of the requested paths and consultation with applicants, it is not possible to satisfy requests for infrastructure capacity adequately. This is because several applicants are applying for the same/adjacent path sections in more or less the same time period.
Conflicting movements — Movements that would require trains to occupy the same portion of track over all or part of their length.
Conformity assessment — The process demonstrating whether requirements specified in the relevant TSI relating to an interoperability constituent have been fulfilled.
Conformity assessment — The process of verifying the conformity of a product according to the provisions of sections 1.8.6 and 1.8.7 related to type examinationl, supervision of manufacture and initial inspection and testing.
Conformity assessment — The process demonstrating whether specified requirements relating to a product, process, service, system, person or body have been fulfilled.
Conformity assessment — The process demonstrating whether the essential requirements of this Directive relating to radio equipment have been fulfilled.
Conformity assessment — Process demonstrating whether specified requirements relating to a product, process, service, subsystem, person or body have been fulfilled (Article 2(41) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Conformity assessment — Process  demonstrating  whether  specified  requirements  relating  to  a  product, process, service, subsystem, person or body have been fulfilled (Article 2(41) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Conformity assessment body — Body that has been notified or designated to be responsible for conformity assessment activities, including calibration, testing, certification and inspection; a conformity assessment body is classified as a ‘notified body’ following notification by a Member State; a conformity assessment body is classified as a ‘designated body’ following designation by a Member State (Article 2(42) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Conformity assessment body — A conformity assessment body as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
Conformity assessment body — A body that performs conformity assessment activities including calibration, testing, certification and inspection.
Conformity assessment body — A body that has been notified or designated to be responsible for conformity assessment activities, including calibration, testing, certification and inspection; a conformity assessment body is classified as a ‘notified body’ following notification by a Member State; a conformity assessment body is classified  as a ‘designated body’ following designation by a Member State.
Conformity assessment body — A body that performs conformity assessment activities.
Conformity assessment body — Body  that  has  been  notified  or  designated  to  be  responsible  for  conformity assessment activities, including calibration, testing, certification and inspection; a  conformity  assessment  body  is  classified  as  a  ‘notified  body’  following notification by a Member State; a conformity assessment body is classified as a ‘designated  body’  following  designation  by  a  Member  State  (Article  2(42)  of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Conformity assessment body — Body  that  has  been  notified  or  designated  to  be  responsible  for  conformity assessment activities, including calibration, testing, certification and inspection; a   conformity   assessment  body   is  classified  as  a  ‘notified  body’   following notification by a Member State; a conformity assessment body is classified as a ‘designated  body’  following  designation  by  a  Member  State  (Article  2(42)  of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Conformity assessment body — A body defined in point 13 of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008, which is accredited in accordance with that Regulation as competent to carry out conformity assessment of a qualified trust service provider and the qualified trust services it provides.
Conformity assessment scheme - Conformity assessment programme — Conformity assessment system related to specified objects of conformity assessment, to which the same specified requirements, specific rules and procedures apply
Conformity assessment system — Rules, procedures and management for carrying out conformity assessment
Congested infrastructure — An element of infrastructure for which demand for infrastructure capacity cannot be fully satisfied during certain periods even after coordination of the different requests for capacity.
Connected rail / railway networks — Neighbouring networks.
Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) — A key EU funding instrument to promote growth, jobs and competitiveness through targeted infrastructure investment at European level.
Connections used between different parts of the vehicle — E.g. connection/suspension/damping system between, e.g. car body and bogie or between axle box and bogie frame.
Connector — The physical interface between the recharging or refuelling point and the vehicle through which the fuel or electric energy is exchanged.
Consent of the data subject — Any freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject's wishes by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her.
Consent of the data subject — Any freely given, specific, informed and unambiguous indication of the data subject’s wishes by which he or she, by a statement or by a clear affirmative action, signifies agreement to the processing of personal data relating to him or her.
Consequence — Any sequence of events consecutive to an initial event (for example a dangerous goods event), resulting in damage.
Consignee — Party by whom the goods are to be received. Synonym: Goods receiver
Consignee — The consignee according to the contract for carriage. If the consignee designates a third party in accordance with the provisions applicable to the contract for carriage, this person shall be deemed to be the consignee within the meaning of RID. If the transport operation takes place without a contract for carriage, the enterprise which takes charge of the dangerous goods on arrival shall be deemed to be the consignee.
Consignee — Any natural or legal person who receives goods pursuant to a contract of carriage; if the transport operation takes place without a contract of carriage, any natural or legal person that takes charge of the goods on arrivals shall be deemed to be the consignee.
Consignee — Person entitled to take delivery of the goods. In the definition, a person means either a physical or legal person or a company.
Consignment — Freight sent under a single contract of carriage. In combined transport, this term may be used for statistical purposes, to measure loading units or road vehicles.
Consignment — Any package or packages, or load of dangerous goods, presented by a consignor for carriage.
Consignment — Collection of goods transported under cover of the same transport document in accordance with regulations or tariffs in force where they exist.
Consignment — Freight sent under a single contract of carriage. In combined transport, this term may be used for statistical purposes, to measure loading units or road vehicles. The grouping together of several consignments into a full load is called consolidation or groupage.
Consignment note — A document, which evidence a contract for the transportation by a carrier of one consignment from a named place of acceptance to a named place of delivery. It contains details of the consignment to be carried.
Consignment order — A subset of the consignment note which shows the relevant information for a RU, needed to carry on the transportation during its responsibility until handover to a next RU. Instruction for the transportation of a wagon consignment.
Consignment stock — Inventory owned by an external provider but held by the organization to ensure the availability (3.1.3.1) of parts.
Consignor — Party which, by contract with a Service Integrator, consigns or sends goods with the carrier, or has them conveyed by him.  Synonyms: Shipper, Goods sender.
Consignor — The enterprise which consigns dangerous goods either on its own behalf or for a third party. If the transport operation is carried out under a contract for carriage, consignor means the consignor according to the contract for carriage.
Consignor — An enterprise which consigns goods either on its own behalf or for a third party.
Consolidation or Groupage — The grouping together of several consignments into a full load.
Consultation phase — This timetabling phase (sometimes also called observation phase) is a dedicated phase for the contracted applicant(s) to provide their observations to the draft timetable offer.
Consumer surplus — Measures the net benefits from consuming a certain quantity of a good/service; also measures how much a consumer would be willing to pay for the consumption of a good, over and above the market price.
CONT — Container
Contact data — The relevant contacts for registration, certification, code attribution and change requests is given in Annex 23 [of the TAP TSI Annex B.56 RU/IM Communication  application_guide].
Contact force — Vertical force applied by the pantograph to the OCL
Contact force permitted — Indication  of  contact  force  allowed  expressed in newton.
Contact length — The distance between the place where a train becomes able to communicate with a device (e.g. a balise) to the place where communication becomes impossible.
Contact line system — A system that distributes the electrical energy to the trains running on the route and transmits it to the trains by means of current collectors. The contact line system is also equipped with manually or remotely controlled disconnectors which are required to isolate sections or groups of the contact line system according to operational necessity. Feeder lines are also part of the contact line system.
Contact line system — System that distributes the electrical energy to the trains running on the route and transmits it to the trains by means of current collectors
Contact strip assessment — Parameter without explanation in the document
Contact strip functional and design parameters — Parameter without explanation in the document
Contact strip geometry — Parameter without explanation in the document
Contact strip material — Parameter without explanation in the document
Contact wire uplift — Vertical upward movement of the contact wire due to the force produced from the pantograph
Container — An article of transport equipment (lift van or other similar structure): – of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use; – specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods, by one or more means of transport, without breakage of load; – fitted with devices permitting its ready stowage and handling, particularly when being transloaded from one means of transport to another; – so designed as to be easy to fill and empty  – having an internal volume of not less than 1 m3, except for containers for the carriage of radioactive material. A swap body is a container which, in accordance with European Standard EN 283:1991 has the following characteristics: – from the point of view of mechanical strength, it is only built for carriage on a wagon or a vehicle on land or by roll-on roll-of ship; – it cannot be stacked; – it can be removed from vehicles by means of equipment on board the vehicle and on its own supports, and can be reloaded; NOTE: The term "container" does not cover conventional packagings, IBCs, tank-containers or wagons. Nevertheless, a container may be used as a packaging for the carriage of radioactive material. In addition: "Closed container" means a totally enclosed container having a rigid roof, rigid side walls, rigid end walls and a floor. The term includes containers with an opening roof where the roof can be closed during transport; "Large container" means  (a) a container which does not meet the definition of a small container; (b) in the meaning of the CSC, a container of a size such that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom corners is either (i) at least 14 m2 (150 square feet) or  (ii) at least 7 m2 (75 square feet) if fitted with top corner fittings; "Open container" means an open top container or a platform based container; "Sheeted container" means an open container equipped with a sheet to protect the goods loaded; "Small container" means a container which has an internal volume of not more than 3 m3.
Container — It is a freight transport equipment: - of a permanent nature and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use; - specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading; - fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another; - so designed as to be easy to fill and empty; - having a length of 20 feet or more.
Container — Special box designed to carry freight. It is strengthened and stackable, allowing horizontal or vertical transfers. A more formal technical definition of a container is: Article of transport equipment which is: a)	Of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use; b)	Specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods, by one or more mode of transport, without intermediate reloading; c)	Fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another; d)	So designed as to be easy to fill and empty; e)	Stackable; and f)	Having an internal volume of 1 m3 or more. Swap bodies are excluded. Although without internal volume, and therefore not satisfying criterion (f) above, flats used in maritime transport should be considered to be a special type of container and therefore are included here.
Container — Generic term for a box to carry freight, strong enough for repeated use, usually stackable and fitted with devices for transfer between modes.
Containment — Any type of technical envelope that is authorised by RID/ADR/ADN for carrying dangerous goods under the conditions defined therein.
Containment system — For the carriage of radioactive material, means the assembly of components of the packaging specified by the designer as intended to retain the radioactive material during carriage.
Content delivery network — A network of geographically distributed servers for the purpose of ensuring high availability, accessibility or fast delivery of digital content and services to internet users on behalf of content and service providers.
CONTI — Continuous
Contingency plan — Plan to be drawn up by the IM, listing the various bodies to be informed in the event of serious incidents or serious disturbance to train movements.
Contingent liability — A potential financial obligation that could be incurred depending on the outcome of a future event.
Contingent valuation method — Valuation technique which asks people directly how much they are willing to pay/to accept for improving/deteriorating environmental quality. Based on the stated preference approach, it is the only method that allows the estimation of existence value.
Continous data transmission — Track-to-train or train-to-track transmission that can take place continuously, independent of location (e.g. by radio).
Continual improvement — Recurring activity to enhance performance (i.e. measurable result) (ISO 9000).
Continuous improvement — A structured approach to analyse the information gathered through regular monitoring, auditing, or other relevant sources and to use the results to learn and to adopt preventive or corrective measures in order to maintain or improve the level of safety.
Continuous improvement — Overall risks should not increase, and preferably should reduce.
Contract — A public contract or a concession contract.
Contract of use for the infrastructure — An agreement (or contract) setting out the terms and conditions for access to the track of an Infrastructure Manager's network. Under such an agreement, companies/operators obtain access to railway track and stations, and certain types of operators obtain access to railway track, stations and certain types of depots. This constitutes the legal basis for the use of any train path granted to a Railway Undertaking.
Contracted TimeTable — It defines the planned route and planned time of a train run. It is delivered by Message 2090 from the IMs to TIS, and merged into an international timetable by TIS.
Contracting activities — A structured approach to ensure that subcontracted activities are managed appropriately in order for the organisation's objectives to be achieved and all competences and requirements are covered.
Contracting entity — Any entity, whether public or private, which orders the design and/or construction or the renewal or upgrading of a subsystem. This entity may be a railway undertaking, an infrastructure manager or a keeper, or the concession holder responsible for carrying out a project.
Contracting entity — Public or private entity which orders the design and/or construction or the renewal or upgrading of a subsystem (Article 2(20) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Contracting entity — A public or private entity which orders the design and/or construction or the renewal or upgrading of a subsystem.
Contracting entity — Public  or  private  entity  which  orders  the  design  and/or  construction  or  the renewal or upgrading of a subsystem (Article 2(20) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Contracting Parties — Concerning the Community and the EC Member States, the Community and the EC Member States, or the Community, or the EC Member States. The meaning to be attributed to this expression in each case is to be deduced from the relevant provisions of this agreement and from the respective competences of the Community and the EC Member States as they follow from the Treaty establishing the European Economic Community (11).
Contracting State — A Member State of the Organisation which has not made a declaration in respect of these Uniform Rules in accordance with Article 42 § 1, first sentence of the Convention.
Contractor — An economic operator with whom a public contract has been signed.
Contractual agreement — An agreement or, mutatis mutandis, an arrangement within the framework of administrative measures.
Contractual agreement — An agreement, or mutatis mutandis, within the framework of administrative measures.
Contractual carrier — In principle, the carrier who concludes the contract of carriage with the passenger and who in principle is the first carrier providing carriage. Substitute carriers are not contractual carriers. The carrier concluding the contract of carriage is described as the “issuing undertaking” in CIT documentation
Contrast C — Difference in luminance factors of the graphical symbol and its background, divided by the larger luminance factor βa, where βb is the smaller luminance factor. C = (βa – βb) / βa
Contrast colour — Colour that contrasts with the safety colour in order to make the safety colour more conspicuous.
Contributing Factor — Any action, omission, event or condition that affects an occurrence by increasing its likelihood, accelerating the effect in time or increasing the severity of the consequences, but the elimination of which would not have prevented the occurrence.
Contribution agreement — An agreement concluded with persons or entities implementing Union funds pursuant to points (c)(ii) to (viii) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1).
Control — Any measure taken to provide reasonable assurance regarding the effectiveness, efficiency and economy of operations, the reliability of reporting, the safeguarding of assets and information, the prevention and detection and correction of fraud and irregularities and their follow-up, and the adequate management of the risks relating to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions, taking into account the multiannual character of programmes as well as the nature of the payments concerned. Controls may involve various checks, as well as the implementation of any policies and procedures to achieve the objectives referred to in the first sentence.
Control (Control measure) — Measure that is modifying risk.
Control activities — A structured approach to ensure: - that vehicles are removed from operation for scheduled, conditional or corrective maintenance in due time, or whenever defects or other needs have been identified; - the necessary quality control measures; - that maintenance tasks are performed in accordance with the maintenance orders and to issue the notice to return to operation that includes eventual restrictions of use; - that possible instance of non-compliance in the application of the management system that might result in accidents, incidents, near-misses or other dangerous occurrences are reported, investigated and analysed and that necessary preventive measures are taken in compliance with the common safety method for monitoring provided in point (c) of Article 6(1); - recurrent internal auditing and monitoring process compliant with the common safety method for monitoring provided in point (c) of Article 6(1).
Control centre — A centralised control system that controls the train movements in a large territory.
Control period — A period of time of two hours maximum as defined by the infrastructure manager for comparing the allocated framework capacity and the remaining free capacity with the purpose of informing potential applicants for framework agreements of the indicative framework capacity allocated and the capacity available.
Control temperature — The maximum temperature at which the organic peroxide, the self-reactive substance or the polymerizing substance can be safely carried.
Control-Command and Signalling Subsystems — They are defined in Annex II of Directive (EU) 2016/797 as: (a) Trackside control-command and signalling as: ‘all the trackside equipment required to ensure safety and to command and control movements of trains authorised to travel on the network.’ (b) On-board control-command and signalling as ‘all the on-board equipment required to ensure safety and to command and control movements of trains authorised to travel on the network’.
Controller — The same meaning as in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001, and in particular Article 2 thereof.
Controller — The natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data; where the purposes and means of such processing are determined by Union or Member State law, the controller or the specific criteria for its nomination may be provided for by Union or Member State law.
Controller — The Union institution or body or the directorate-general or any other organisational entity which, alone or jointly with others, determines the purposes and means of the processing of personal data; where the purposes and means of such processing are determined by a specific Union act, the controller or the specific criteria for its nomination can be provided for by Union law.
Controllers other than Union institutions and bodies — Controllers within the meaning of point (7) of Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and controllers within the meaning of point (8) of Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2016/680.
Controlling entity — A body or firm, which exercises direct or indirect control over an operator of a service facility and is also active and holds a dominant position in national railway transport services markets for which the facility is used or exercises direct or indirect control over an operator of a service facility and a railway undertaking holding such a position.
Controls and indicators — Functional requirements are specified with other requirements applicable to a specific function, in the clause describing that function.
Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail (COTIF) — International Convention concluded in 1980 aiming at developing uniform systems of law which could apply to the carriage of passengers and freight in international rail traffic.
Conventional high-sped railway vehicle — Any railway vehicle not specially designed to run on dedicated or upgraded high-speed lines but still being able to reach a maximum operating speed of approximately 200 km/h.
Conventional railway line — A principal railway line that is not classified as high-speed railway line.
Conventional railway line — All railway lines that are not classified as «dedicated high speed lines» or «upgraded high speed railway lines».
Conventional screw coupling and other non-automatic coupling systems — Requirements for conventional screw coupling systems as well as other non-automatic coupling systems (e.g. semi-permanent inner couplings), their components and their interaction. Included: draw gear, draw hook, draw gear suspension. Excluded: buffers and buffing systems (therefore see parameter 2.2.4 ‘Buffing’), as well as air, brake, energy and control connections.
Conventional railway system — Railway system in which rolling stock is supported and guided by steel wheels on a pair of steel rails, located beneath the rolling stock, regardless of their design speed and track gauge.
Conveyance — For carriage by road or by rail, a road vehicle or a wagon.
Cooperation mode — Mode of train operation where various RU cooperate under the leadership of one RU (LRU). Each involved RU contracts the needed path for the transport journey on its own.
Coordinating IM — The IM in charge of path allocation on the network where the initiating applicant holds the rights to the allocated path.
Coordinating OSS / C-OSS — The national OSS first contacted by a (potential/future) applicant for a train path. The C-OSS first contacted by an Applicant.
Coordination — The process through which the infrastructure manager and applicants will attempt to resolve situations in which there are conflicting applications for infrastructure capacity.
Coordination of requests — This refers to the co-ordinated path applications of each applicant group. It is part of the draft timetabling and path allocation process.
Coordination of TCRs — The cooperation between IMs aimed at finding the best way to plan TCRs.  The aim of coordination efforts between Infrastructure Managers is the safe implementation of railway operations and to find the best solution for planning operational restrictions resulting from construction measures while taking into consideration the requirements of the market.
Coordination procedure — A procedure through which the operator of a service facility and applicants attempt to resolve situations in which needs for access to a service facility or rail-related services concern the same service facility capacity and are in conflict.
COPA — Committee of Professional Agricultural Organisations
COPEC — Joint Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men (FR: comité paritaire de l’égalité des chances)
COR — Common Operational Rule
CoR — European Committee of the Regions
CORDIS — Community Research and Development Information Service
Core network — The transport infrastructure identified in accordance with Chapter III of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
Core network corridors — Instruments to facilitate the coordinated implementation of the core network as provided for in Chapter IV of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 and listed in Part III of the Annex to this Regulation.
Coreper — Permanent Representatives Committee
Corine — Coordination of information on the environment in Europe
Corner Fitting — Fixed points usually located at the top and bottom corners of a container into which twistlocks or other devices engage to enable the container to be lifted, stacked, secured. These fittings are increasingly used on swap bodies, although not on the corners but at points which are compatible with 20 or 40 feet container corner fittings.
Corporate Management Board (CMB) — It provides the highest level of corporate management oversight for operational and administrative issues in the Commission.
Corrected value — Value allocated by the user to a given parameter to replace the value set by default for this parameter by the harmonised risk estimation model. Only the value of an ‘open parameter’ can be corrected. Note: when setting a corrected value, the user shall provide evidence and justify that the correction is necessary to improve the quality of the risk estimation. See also ‘fixed parameter’
Corridor Information Document (CID) — A document drawn up, regularly updated and published by the Corridor Management Board. This document comprises all the information contained in the network statement of national networks regarding the freight corridor in accordance with Chapter 4, Article 27 of DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU; the list and characteristics of terminals, in particular information concerning the conditions and methods of accessing the terminals; information concerning the procedures of application for capacity, capacity allocation to freight trains, traffic management coordination, traffic management in the event of disturbance and the implementation plan.
Corridor One-Stop Shop (C-OSS) — The management board of a freight corridor shall designate or set up a joint body for applicants to request and to receive answers, in a single place and in a single operation, regarding infrastructure capacity for freight trains crossing at least one border along the freight corridor.
Corridor organisation — Governance structure of a Rail Freight Corridor according to Article 8 of EU Regulation 913/2010.
COST — European   Cooperation   in   the   field   of   Scientific   and   Technical   Research (Cooperation  européenne  dans  le  domaine  de  la  recherche  Scientifique  et Technique)
COST — European cooperation in science and technology (old name: European cooperation in the field of scientific and technical research)
Cost effectiveness — The costs of producing statistics must be in proportion to the importance of the results and the benefits sought, that resources must be optimally used and the response burden minimised. The information requested shall, where possible, be readily extractable from available records or sources.
Cost of damage to environment — Costs that are to be met by Railway Undertakings and Infrastructure Managers, appraised on the basis of their experience, in order to restore the damaged area to its state before the railway accident.
Cost of delays as a consequence of accidents — The monetary value of delays incurred by users of rail transport (passengers and freight customers) as a consequence of accidents, calculated by the model showed in Annex I of Directive (EU) 2016/798
Cost of material damage to rolling stock or infrastructure — The cost of providing new rolling stock or infrastructure, with the same functionalities and technical parameters as that damaged beyond repair, and the cost of restoring repairable rolling stock or infrastructure to its state before the accident, to be estimated by Railway Undertakings and Infrastructure Managers on the basis of their experience, including also costs related to the leasing of rolling stock, as a consequence of non-availability due to damaged vehicles.
Cost-effectiveness — Minimising the costs of achieving a given (e.g. environmental) objective/target; a “second-best” efficiency criterion, often used when a full cost-benefit analysis is not feasible.
COTIF — Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail
COTIF — Convention Concerning International Carriage by Rail (Convention relative aux Transports Internationaux Ferroviaires)
COTS-product — Commercial off-the-shelf products
Counterpart — The party that is granted a budgetary guarantee.
Couple (a coach group) — Attach a coach group to a pulling train
Coupler system — Vehicle-mounted equipment to connect railway vehicles to transfer traction/braking forces and dissipate compressive energy. Note 1 to entry: A coupler is a mechanical device. It optionally supports e. g. the transfer of power, data or air between railway vehicles.
Couplers/coupling systems — Parameter without explanation in the document
Coupling — Mechanical interface that enables vehicles to operate together (adapted)
Coupon — Paper document which is delivered to issuing offices to be made out as a ticket or a reservation ticket. Several coupons may be used together to form a through ticket in so far as the special conditions of carriage explicitly provide for that. In that case they are to be cross referenced (“numbering of pages” in TD B.6 or permanently secured in a single cover or issued in a ticket wallet
Covered wagon — Wagon characterised by its closed construction with a roof and fully enclosed sides, capable of being locked and/ or sealed. Wagons with an opening roof as well as those insulated, heated and refrigerated are included. Sometimes also referred to as enclosed car.
COVID-19 — Coronavirus disease 2019
CPVO — Community Plant Variety Office
CR — Change Request
CR — Conventional Rail
CR — Costa Rica
Crane — Conventional lifting crane where the load is suspended by cable via a jib.
Crate — An outer packaging with incmplete surfaces.
CRC — Cyclic Redundancy Code
CRD — Common Repository Domain listing in machine readable format the rail locations used in the data exchange
CRD — Central Repository Domain - The reference file for locations
Creator of a seal — A legal person who creates an electronic seal.
Credit — Confirmation that a part of a qualification, consisting of a coherent set of learning outcomes has been assessed and validated by a competent authority, according to an agreed standard; credit is awarded by competent authorities when the individual has achieved the efined learning outcomes, evidenced by appropriate assessments and can be expressed in a quantitative value (e.g. credits or credit points) demonstrating the estimated workload an individual typically needs for achieving related learning outcomes
Credit systems — A transparency tool for facilitating the recognition of credit(s). These systems can comprise, inter alia, equivalences, exemptions, units/modules that can be accumulated and transferred, the autonomy of providers who can individualise pathways, and the validation of non-formal and informal learning
Credit transfer — The process of allowing individuals who have accumulated credit in one context to have it valued and recognised in another context.
CREST — Scientific and Technical Research Committee (FR: comité de la recherche scientifique et technique)
CRG — Cargo
Crisis — (a) a situation of immediate or imminent danger threatening to escalate into an armed conflict or to destabilise a country or its neighbourhood; (b) a situation caused by natural disasters, man-made crisis such as wars and other conflicts or extraordinary circumstances having comparable effects related, inter alia, to climate change, environmental degradation, privation of access to energy and natural resources or extreme poverty.
Critical accident — An accident typically affecting a very small number of people and resulting in at least one fatality.
Critical entity — A public or private entity which has been identified by a Member State in accordance with Article 6 as belonging to one of the categories set out in the third column of the table in the Annex.
Critical event (CE) (in the bow-tie): — In Bow-tie Terminology:  This term is commonly defined as the event causing a loss of containment (LOC). This definition is quite accurate for fluids, as they usually behave dangerously after release. For solids and more especially for mass solid storage, the term “loss of physical integrity” (LPI) is considered more appropriate, as the critical event in this case is the change of chemical and/or physical state of the substance. The critical event is the centre of the bow-tie.
Critical heat flux at extinguishment (CFE) — Incident heat flux at the surface of a specimen at the point along its horizontal centreline where the flame ceases to advance and may subsequently go out Note 1 to entry: The heat flux value reported is based on interpolations of measurements with a non-combustible calibration board. Note 2 to entry: The critical heat flux at extinguishment is expressed in kilowatts per square metre (kW/m2).
Critical infrastructure — An asset, a facility, equipment, a network or a system, or a part of an asset, a facility, equipment, a network or a system, which is necessary for the provision of an essential service.
Critical or criticality — Characteristic having the potential of introducing high risks that can threaten quality, safety or business performance, based on a risk assessment
Critical path — Sequence of activities that determine the earliest possible completion date for the project (3.1.2.18) or phase.
Critical temperature — The temperature above which the substance cannot exist in the liquid state.
Criticality — The point at which a failure or a number of failures renders the system unusable and/or unsafe.
Criticality safety index (CSI) — It is assigned to a package, overpack or container containing fissile material, for the carriage of radioactive material, means a number which is used to provide control over the accumulation of packages, overpacks or containers containing fissile material.
Cronos — Database of macroeconomic time series (Eurostat)
Cross border link — In the transport sector, a project of common interest which ensures the continuity of the TEN-T between Member States or between a Member State and a third country.
Cross section area — Smallest   cross   section   area   in   square metres of the tunnel
Cross-Acceptance — The status achieved by a product that has been accepted by one Authority to the relevant European Standards and is acceptable to other Authorities without the necessity for further assessment. (4)
Cross-border agreement — Any agreement between two or more Member States or between Member States and third countries intended to facilitate the provision of cross-border rail services.
Cross-border interoperability — The ability of Union entities and public sector bodies of Member States to interact
Cross-border processing — (a) processing of personal data which takes place in the context of the activities of establishments in more than one Member State of a controller or processor in the Union where the controller or processor is established in more than one Member State; or (b) processing of personal data which takes place in the context of the activities of a single establishment of a controller or processor in the Union but which substantially affects or is likely to substantially affect data subjects in more than one Member State.
Cross-border project — A project covering a cross-border section between two or more Member States.
Cross-border project in the field of renewable energy — A project selected or eligible to be selected under a cooperation agreement or any other kind of arrangement between two or more Member States or arrangements between one or more Member States and one or more third countries as set out in Articles 8, 9, 11 and 13 of Directive (EU) 2018/2001 in the planning or deployment of renewable energy, in accordance with the criteria set out in Part IV of the Annex to this Regulation.
Cross-border section — The section which ensures the continuity of a project of common interest on both sides of a border, situated between the closest urban nodes to the border of two Member States or between a Member State and a neighbouring country.
Cross-trade — It is international road transport between two different countries performed by a road motor vehicle registered in a third country.  A third country is a country other than the country of loading/embarkation and than the country of unloading/disembarkation. This transport is reported by the country in which the vehicle is registered.
Crosswind — Strong wind blowing laterally to a line which may adversely affect the safety of trains running.
Crosswind effects — Refers to impact upon vehicle equipment and functions due to crosswinds. Characteristics of wind (e.g. wind speed) to be considered for the design of rolling stock to ensure safety, functionality and integrity.
Cryogenic receptacle — A transportable thermally insulated pressure receptacle for refrigerated liquefied gases of a water capacity of not more than 1 000 litres (see also "Open cryogenic receptacle").
Cryogenic storage (with cooling system) — This term refers to storage tanks maintained at atmospheric pressure or at a lower pressure and at a low temperature. The substance stored is a refrigerated liquefied gas.
cs — Czech
CSC — The International Convention for Safe Containers (Geneva, 1972) as amended and published by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), London.
CSCE — Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (now OSCE)
CSDP — Common security and defence policy
CSF — Community support framework
CSI — Common Safety Indicator
CSM — Common Safety Methods
CSM — Common Safety Methods
CSM — Ceiling Speed Monitoring
CSM — Common safety method
CSM on risk assessment — This term is used to designate the Annex I of the Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 402/2013 of 30 April 2013 on the common safety method for risk evaluation and assessment and repealing Regulation (EC) No 352/2009 (OJ L 121, 3.5.2013, p. 8).
CST — Common Safety Target
cSt — Centistokes
CST — Scientific and Technical Committee (Euratom)
CSTs — Common safety targets
CT — Combined Transport
CTA — Connection Time Available - interval between scheduled arrival of the first train and scheduled departure of the second
CTS — Conformance testing services
CU — Cuba
cu.in — Cubic inch
Current capacity of pantograph including contact strip — Parameter without explanation in the document
Current collector — Equipment fitted to the vehicle and intended to collect current from a contact wire or conductor rail
Current collector — Equipment fitted to a railway vehicle and intended to collect current from a contact wire or conductor rail.
Current or power limitation on board required — Indication  of  whether  an  on  board  current  or  power  limitation  function  on  vehicles is required.
Current position — The position of a train measured at a certain moment using defined system co-ordinates.
Curvature of the platform — Indication  of  the  existence  of  the  curvature  of  the  platform.
Customer — Is the entity which has issued the consignment note to the Lead RU.
Customer — A person who intends to buy, is buying, or has bought a railway product for him/herself or for other person(s). May therefore be different from passenger (see passenger)
Customer — A person who intends to buy, is buying, or has bought a railway product for him/herself or for other person(s). May therefore be different from passenger (see passenger) (from the TAP glossary)
Customer — Consignor and/or consignee shown on the consignment note
Customer agreement — Special agreement concluded between the customer or a third party on  the one hand and the carrier on the other in respect of one or more  consignments subject to the CIM Uniform Rules
Customer Information Platform (CIP) — CIP is an interactive, Internet-based information tool. By means of a Graphical User Interface (GUI), CIP provides precise information on the routing, terminals, specific track properties and infrastructure investment projects, as well as ICM lines and their re-routing options of the participating corridors. All essential corridor-related information documents, such as this CID, capacity offer and temporary capacity restrictions (TCRs) are alsoaccessible in CIP
CUV — ---
CV — Cabo Verde
CW — Curaçao
CX — Christmas Island
CY — Cyprus
Cyber threat — A cyber threat as defined in Article 2, point (8), of Regulation (EU) 2019/881.
Cybersecurity — Cybersecurity as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2019/881.
Cylinder — A pressure receptacle of a water capacity not exceeding 150 litres (also "Bundle of cylinders").
Cylinder capacity — It is the capacity of the vehicle's engine as certified by the competent authority of the country of registration.
CZ — Czechia
D — Diameter of wheel
D-ARS function — Application, Registration and data Storage (ARS) function (decentralised)
da — Danish
Daily noise exposure level (LEX,8h) (dB(A) re. 20 μPa) — Time-weighted average of the noise exposure levels for a nominal eight-hour working day as defined by international standard ISO 1999: 1990, point 3.6. It covers all noises present at work, including impulsive noise.
Damage — Outcome of hazardous events in which vulnerabilities are exposed to hazards (see exposure). Damage may be quantified or qualified by the measurement of its severity.  Within this framework, damage may also be used to describe harm in the case of human or animal vulnerabilities.
Damage indicators — Measure indicating an intensity of damage (severity) for a pre-defined type of impact. For example, Type of impact: lethality due to exposure to heat radiations Damage indicator: number of fatalities within exposed group of people
DANGER (aspect) — An indication given by a signal to stop.
Danger Area — The danger area of a platform commences at the rail side edge of the platform and is defined as the area where passengers are not allowed to stand when trains are passing or arriving.
Danger Point — The location beyond the End of Movement Authority that can be reached by the front of the train without creating a hazardous situation.
Dangerous (or hazardous) substance — The Seveso Directive defines a hazardous substance as a dangerous substance’ means a substance or mixture covered by Part 1 or listed in Part 2 of Annex I, including in the form of a raw material, product, by- product, residue or intermediate. The classification of hazardous substances in the Directive is derived from the EU CLP-Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008.
Dangerous goods — As covered by Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the inland transport of dangerous goods (1)
Dangerous goods — Those substances and articles the carriage of which is prohibited by RID, or authorized only under the conditions prescribed therein.
Dangerous goods — Those substances and articles the carriage of which is prohibited by RID, or authorised only under the conditions prescribed therein.
Dangerous goods — The classes of dangerous goods carried by rail are those defined by the UN Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods: a)	Class 1: Explosives b)	Class 2: Gases c)	Class 3: Flammable liquids d)	Class 4: Flammable solids; substances liable to spontaneous combustion; substances which, on contact with water, emit flammable gases e)	Class 5: Oxidising substances and organic peroxides f)	Class 6: Toxic and infectious substances g)	Class 7: Radioactive material h)	Class 8: Corrosive substances i)	Class 9: Miscellaneous dangerous substances and articles, including environmentally hazardous substances
Dangerous goods — Those substances and articles whose carriage is prohibited by RID/ADR/ADN, or authorised only under the conditions prescribed therein.
Dangerous goods / hazardous materials / restricted articles — Dangerous goods are the United Nation's official term for Hazardous Materials. These are materials and objects of which the carriage is prohibited under the RID (International regulation on the carriage of dangerous goods by rail) or authorised only under certain conditions, because they are substances / articles that have dangerous properties that can cause injury to people, and damage to the environment, property and other goods, unless they are correctly handled during transport - including movement, loading, unloading, storage and other handling. A few examples: explosive substances and articles, gases, flammable liquids, toxic substances, radioactive materials.
Dangerous goods classification — The classification of dangerous goods (for the purpose of transport) as defined in chapter 2 of RID/ADR/ADN.
Dangerous goods event — Incident and/or accident involving a dangerous goods transport unit. It covers situations both where dangerous substance(s) are released and not released.
Dangerous phenomenon "fully developed" — In Bow-tie Terminology: Dangerous phenomenon whose effects are not limited by preventive or mitigating measures.
Dangerous phenomenon (DP) (right side): — In Bow-tie Terminology: This is an event following the tertiary critical event (for example, the pool fire after the ignition of a pool). Examples of dangerous phenomena are a vapour cloud explosion, a flash fire, etc.
Dangerous phenomenon with "limited effects" — In Bow-tie Terminology: Effects of the dangerous phenomenon are mitigated by a successful barrier in the event tree (for example, a water curtain acts to limit formation of gas clouds).
Dangerous phenomenon with a "limited source term" — In Bow-tie Terminology: In this case, the consequences of the dangerous phenomenon are limited by a successful safety barrier at the source (for example, by limiting the size of the pool or the release duration).
Dangerous reaction — (a) combustion or evolution of considerable heat; (b) evolution of flammable, asphyxiant, oxidizing or toxic gases; (c) the formation of corrosive substances; (d) the formation of unstable substances; or (e) dangerous rise in pressure (for tanks only).
Dangerous substance release — See “Release”.
DAS — Driver Advisory System
DAS — Driving Advisory System
DAS Inhibition Zone — The prevention of the DAS functionality over a defined area of the railway in the direction of travel. It may be in either or both directions of a bi-directional section of track.
Data — Data as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2022/868 of the European Parliament and of the Council
Data centre service — A service that encompasses structures, or groups of structures, dedicated to the centralised accommodation, interconnection and operation of IT and network equipment providing data storage, processing and transport services together with all the facilities and infrastructures for power distribution and environmental control.
Data collection — Surveys and all other methods of deriving information from different sources, including administrative sources.
Data concerning health — Personal data related to the physical or mental health of a natural person, including the provision of health care services, which reveal information about his or her health status.
Data concerning health — Personal data related to the physical or mental health of a natural person, including the provision of healthcare services, which reveal information about his or her health status.
Data integrity — The property that a message has not been modified or destroyed.
Data owner — The individual responsible for ensuring the protection and use of a specific data set handled by a CIS.
Data repository — An information system, managed by the European Environment Agency, containing environmental noise information and data made available through national data reporting and exchange nodes under the control of the Member States.
Data set — A set of information which serves a specific business process or activity of the Commission.
Data user — A stakeholder authorised to download the timetable data of one or more RUs, under usage conditions
Date of receipt of the application — (a) where the Agency acts as the authorising entity, the first working day common to the Agency and to the NSAs concerned with the intended area of use following the acknowledgement of receipt of the application; (b) where a NSA acts as the authorising entity, the first working day in the Member State concerned following the acknowledgement of receipt of the application.
Date of receipt of the application — (a) where the Agency acts as the safety certification body, the first working day common to the Agency and to the national safety authorities concerned with the intended area of operation following the acknowledgement of receipt of the application file; (b) where a national safety authority acts as the safety certification body, the first working day in the Member State concerned following the acknowledgement of receipt of the application file.
Date of receipt of the application — The first working day in the Member State concerned following the acknowledgement of receipt of the application file.
Days of operation — A conventional representation used to indicate in which days of a given time period a service is present or not. It consists of a string of as many digits as there are days in the given time period, with value 1 for the days when the service is present and value 0 for the others). When the time period is one week, for patterns repeated equally every week, it is possible to use the alternative representation of the “working week” (see)
dB — Decibels
DB — Deutsche Bahn – German State Railways
dB — Decibel
dBA — A-weighted decibel
DC — Direct Current
DC — Direct current
DC(s) — Direct cause(s)
DCS — On-ground energy data collecting system (data collecting service)
DDAF — Derailment detection and actuation function
DDF — Derailment detection function
DE — ATO Disengaging
DE — Germany
de — German
De-commitment (see cancellation of appropriations) — Cancellation of appropriations that may no longer be used.
De-registration — Termination of the temporary relationship between the telephone number and the train running number. This action can be initiated by the user of a GSM-R radio, by automatic systems or by the network authority. The de-registration allows the de-registered train running number to be re-used.
De-registration — Termination of the temporary relationship between the telephone number and the train running number. This action can be initiated by the user of a GSM-R radio, by automatic systems or by the network authority. The de- registration allows the de-registered train running number to be re-used.
Death (killed person) — Any person killed immediately or dying within 30 days as a result of an accident, excluding any suicide.
DeBo — Designated Body
DeBos issue — This is outside the scope of this document and only used as a placeholder not to forget that DeBo certificates for ICs are not foreseen.
Deceleration data — Data that relates to the braking performance of the train.
Decision-making — Decision-making is a process of selecting the best among the different alternatives / options. It is the act of making a choice. The degree to which different alternatives are expected to meet the decision making objectives is measured with decision-making indicators corresponding to decision-making criteria.
Decision-making criteria — A reference (qualitative or quantitative) which is used for assessing decision-making indicators. Criteria that are considered in a process of decision-making. Criteria are generally used to characterise the degree to which different alternatives are expected to meet the decision-making objectives.
Decision-making indicators — An indicator (qualitative or quantitative measurement) to be compared with reference criteria used in a decision-making process.
Decision-making principle — In principle objective which is assessed within a decision-making process in order to optimise a risk situation. In the Guide for decision-making, decision-making principles are risk-based principles which may be supplemented with decision-making criteria of external origin under the responsibility of the decision-maker.
Declaration of conformity to an authorised vehicle type — The declaration established for a vehicle by the applicant in which the applicant declares on its sole responsibility that the vehicle concerned, which has been subject to the relevant verification procedures, conforms to an authorised vehicle type and satisfies the requirements of the relevant Union law and relevant national rules.
Declarations — Declarations from the applicant they are always called "EC" declarations.
Decommitment — An operation whereby the authorising officer responsible cancels wholly or partly the reservation of appropriations previously made by means of a budgetary commitment.
Decomposition — This critical event concerns only solid substances. It corresponds to a change of chemical state of the substance (loss of physical integrity) by action of an energy/heat source or by reaction with a chemical substance (incompatible reagent). The decomposition of the substance leads, as secondary and tertiary critical events, to an emission of toxic products or to a delayed explosion following formation of flammable gas. This critical event concerns only mass solid storage.
Decryption — The converting of encrypted data back into their original form
DECT — Digital European cordless telecommunications
Dedicated capacity — Capacity that has to be jointly defined and organised by the Infrastructure Managers of a Rail Freight Corridor to fulfil the requirements of EU Regulation 913/2010. It refers to pre-arranged paths (PaPs) and reserve capacity.
Dedicated high-speed railway line — A line specially built to allow traffic at speeds equal to or greater than 250 km/h for the main segments. High speed lines may include connecting lines, in particular connecting segments into town centre stations located on them, on which speeds may take account of local conditions. Includes lines on which new tracks were added to existing tracks that are not upgraded.
Dedicated line — A dedicated line is a rail link used exclusively by one type of traffic (freight or passengers), for example the Betuwe Line in the Netherlands. There are also dedicated high-speed lines, as high-speed trains require special infrastructure (dedicated track). Do not confuse with a specialised line (a rail link where one type of traffic – freight or passengers – will be preferred and given priority when allocating capacity).
Deep sea shipping — It refers to the maritime transport of goods on intercontinental routes, crossing oceans; as opposed to short sea shipping over relatively short distances.
Default value — Value stored in the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment and used if there is no other value available.
Defensive expenditures — Valuation technique wherein a value for environmental quality is inferred from people’s (voluntary) expenditures aimed at improving their situation.
Deferred work — Activity which is part of a predetermined sequence in a process that is delayed or postponed.
Definitions related to rolling stock — All definitions related to rolling stock are defined in the LOC&PAS TSI and the WAG TSI
Degraded condition — Unfavourable external influence on the subsystem or on the interoperability constituent.
Degraded mode — Failure, or wear limit reached, in the subsystem or in the interoperability constituent.
Degraded operation — Operation resulting from an unplanned event that prevents the normal delivery of train services.
Degree Celsius (°C) — Degree Celsius
Degree of filling — The ratio, expressed in %, of the volume of liquid or solid introduced at 15 °C into the means of containment and the volume of the means of containment ready for use.
Delay — The time difference between the time the passenger was scheduled to arrive according to the published timetable and the time of his/her actual or expected arrival.
Delay — The time difference between the time the passenger was scheduled to arrive in accordance with the published timetable and the time of his or her actual or expected arrival at the station of final destination.
Delay attribution — The accurate identification of the causes for delays, cancellations, diversions and other events is of prime importance to enable all parties involved to create action plans to improve operational performance. Delay causes have been codified by the UIC in Leaflet 450 – 2, Delay coding and delay cause attribution process (2008)
Deliverable — Output for the scope of supply to fulfil defined requirements. EXAMPLE:Product, services, user manual, training manual, maintenance manual, test reports, test equipment, training, spare and support parts.
Deliverable (TAP -) — One of the documents that must be produced as result of TAP Phase One
Delta deviation — The operational ‘lateness or earliness’ in relation to the booked scheduled time
Demountable tank — A tank designed to fit the special apparatus of the wagon but which can only be removed from it after dismantling their means of attachment.
Departure date/time, actual — Date (and time) of departure of means of transport.
Departure date/time, actual — The actual date (And time) of departure of means of transport
Departure date/time, estimated — The date (And time) of departure of means of transport based on current forecast
Departure date/time, planned — The date (And time) of departure of means of transport in the timetable
Departure delay, actual — The time difference between the actual departure date/time and the Planned departure date/time
Departure delay, expected — The time difference from the departure date/time and the expected departure date/time
Departure point — Railway station or halt, bus station, bus stop or a port. Departure point may also be a specific region, a specific country or a frontier point
Departure time — Planned departure time: the time at which a train is scheduled to depart from a given point of origin.  Actual departure time: the time at which a train actually departs from a station or other point of origin.
Derailment — Any case in which at least one wheel of a train leaves the rails. Derailments as a result of collisions are excluded. These are classified as collisions.
Derailment detection and actuation function (DDAF) — It is a function that shall automatically activate a brake application when the derailment is detected without possibility of overriding by the driver.
Derailment detection and prevention function — It is a function intended to prevent derailments or to mitigate the consequences of a derailment of the unit.
Derailment detection function (DDF) — It is a function that shall send a signal to the driver’s cab of the locomotive hauling the train once the derailment is detected in the unit.
Derailment of train — Any case in which at least one wheel of a train leaves the rails.
Derailment prevention function (DPF) — It is a function that shall send a signal to the driver’s cab of the locomotive hauling the train once a precursor to derailment is detected in the unit.
Design — For the carriage of radioactive material, the description of fissile material excepted under 2.2.7.2.3.5 (f), special form radioactive material, low dispersible radioactive material, package or packaging which enables such an item to be fully identified. The description may include specifications, engineering drawings, reports demonstrating compliance with regulatory requirements, and other relevant documentation.
Design file — For composite cylinders and tubes, means the maximum life (in number of years) for which the cylinder or tube is designed and approved in accordance with the applicable standard.
Design operating state — The normal operating mode and the foreseeable degraded conditions (including wear) within the range and conditions of use specified in the technical and maintenance files. It covers all conditions under which the subsystem is intended to operate and its technical boundaries.
Design operating state — Covers all conditions under which the unit is intended to operate and its technical boundaries. This design operating state may go beyond the specifications of this TSI in order that units may be used together in a train on the network under the safety management system of a railway undertaking.
Design operating state — The normal operating mode and the foreseeable degraded conditions (including wear) within the range and the conditions of use specified in the technical and maintenance files.
Design phase — The design phase is the period starting once a notified body, which is responsible for EC verification, is contracted by the applicant and ending when the EC type or design examination certificate is issued. A design phase can cover a type and one or several type variant(s) and type version(s). For all type variant(s) and type version(s), the design phase is considered as starting at the same time as for the main type.
Design phase — The design phase is the period starting once a notified body, which is responsible for EC verification, is contracted by the applicant and ending when the EC type or design examination certificate is issued.A design phase can cover a type and one or several type variant(s) and type version(s). For all type variant(s) and type version(s), the design phase is considered as starting at the same time as for the main type.
Design phase for CCS On-Board Subsystem — It is the period starting once a notified body, which is responsible for EC verification, is contracted by the applicant and ending when the EC type or design examination certificate is issued. A design phase covers the CCS subsystem integrated in a vehicle type and one or several type variant(s) and type version(s). For all type variant(s) and type version(s), the design phase is considered as starting at the same time as for the main type.
Design review — it includes checking of correctness of values/parameters against applicable TSI requirements related to the final design.
Design track gauge — A single value which is obtained when all the components of the track conform precisely to their design dimensions or their median design dimension when there is a range.
Design Type Certificate — The attestation issued by the competent authority of the admission of a type of construction, including the conditions of the admission.
Design value — Theoretical value without manufacturing, construction or maintenance tolerances.
Design, operation and maintenance constraints for the transport of dangerous goods — E.g. requirements derived from RID, national rules or other regulations for the transport of dangerous goods; including facilities specifically required for dangerous goods.
Designated authority — The authority which is the point of contact for the project promoter and which facilitates the efficient and structured processing of permit-granting procedures in accordance with this Directive.
Designated body — A body designated by a Member State in accordance with Article 17(3) of Directive 2008/57/EC for verification of compliance of a subsystem with the national rules.
Desk — Inside a cab, the set of operating controls, which is dedicated to preferred movements in a given direction (i.e. forward movements, in which visibility from the cab is provided to the driver). Exception: some single cab locomotives are fitted with one single desk, allowing normal movements in both directions.
Desk ergonomics — Requirements concerning ergonomics on the driver's desk, e.g. activation direction of levers and switches, ergonomics of emergency systems.
Despatch (= dispatch) — See Train despatch
Destination point — Railway station or halt, bus station, bus stop or a port. Destination point may also be a specific region, a specific country or a frontier point
Detailed direct causes (DDC) (left side) — In Bow-tie Terminology: The detailed direct cause is the event or collection of events that led to the direct cause.
Details on GSM-R roaming to public networks — If  roaming  to  public  networks  is  configured,  please  indicate  to  which  networks, for which users and in which areas.
Detection of contact strip breakage — Parameter without explanation in the document
Development — The activities aiming at setting up, strengthening and improving the statistical methods, standards and procedures used for the production and dissemination of statistics as well as at designing new statistics and indicators.
Development of the railway infrastructure — Network planning, financial and investment planning as well as the building and upgrading of the infrastructure.
DG — Directorate-general (see also Section 9.6 ‘Commission directorates-general and services: official titles’)
DG — Dangerous goods
DG Move — Directorate General for Mobility and Transport of the European Commission
DG transport unit — A transport unit carrying dangerous goods cargo.
DGNR — Dangerous goods event without release (No Release)
DGR — Dangerous goods release
DGSC — Dangerous goods scenario
Diameter — For shells of tanks, the internal diameter of the shell.
DIANE — Direct information access network for Europe
Diesel and other thermal traction system requirements — For ‘Exhaust gas emissions’ see parameter 6.2.1.2 (Exhaust gas emissions).
Diesel multiple unit (DMU) — diesel powered MU.
Diesel or other thermal traction allowed — Indication  whether  it  is  allowed  to  use diesel  or  other  thermal  traction  in  the tunnel.
Digital connectivity infrastructure — Very high capacity networks, 5G systems, very high-quality local wireless connectivity and backbone networks, as well as operational digital platforms directly associated with transport and energy infrastructure.
Digital schematic  overview — Diagrammatic  representation  of  the  operational  point  in  Well Known  Text  polyline
Digital service — A service as defined in Article 1(1), point (b), of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Digitally-connected recharging point — A recharging point that can send and receive information in real time, communicate bi-directionally with the electricity grid and the electric vehicle, and that can be remotely monitored and controlled, including in order to start and stop the recharging session and to measure electricity flows.
Digitisation — The process of transforming a record on paper or any other traditional medium into an electronic rendition.
DIN — DE: Deutsche Industrie Norm
Direct award — The award of a public service contract to a given public service operator without any prior competitive tendering procedure.
Direct braking command — Requirements concerning the direct braking command.
Direct causes (DC) (left side) — In Bow-tie Terminology: The immediate causes of the necessary and sufficient causes (NSCs). For a given NSC, the list of direct causes tends to be the most complete possible.
Direct fulfilment — The provision to a customer of a travel document printed on value paper at the same time of the purchase
Direct identification — The identification of a statistical unit from its name or address, or from a publicly accessible identification number.
Direct Management — One of the three forms of implementation of the EU budget, based on direct management (selecting contractors, awarding grants, transferring funds, monitoring activities, etc.) of a fund or programme by the European Commission (centralised direct management) or one of its agencies (centralised indirect management).
Direct train — A train with related wagons which runs between two transhipment points (initial source – final destination) without intermediate marshalling.
Direction of measurement of trackside HABD — Specific  for  the  French  Italian  and  Swed ish networks. Applicable  if  trackside  HABD  is  not  TSI compliant,  direction  of  measurement  of trackside Hot Axle Box Detector. If the direction of measurement is: -  the  same  as  the  direction  defined  by the start and end of the SoL: (N) -  the  opposite  to  the  direction  defined by the start and end of the SoL: (O) -  both directions: (B)
Directive 2008/57 — Directive 2008/57/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the interoperability of the rail system within the Community
Directory — A publicly available directory of users or an internal directory of users available within a Union institution or body or shared between Union institutions and bodies, whether in printed or electronic form.
Discharge — Decision by which the European Parliament closes an annual budget exercise, based on a recommendation from the Council and a declaration of assurance from the Court of Auditors.  It covers the accounts of all the Union’s revenue and expenditure, the resulting balance, and assets and liabilities, as shown in the balance sheet.
Discharge pressure — The maximum pressure actually built up in the tank when it is being discharged under pressure (see also "Calculation pressure", "Filling pressure", "Maximum working pressure (gauge pressure)" and "Test pressure").
Disconnect (a coach (group)) — Detach a coach group from one pulling train that continues its journey, because the coach group has reached its final destination or because it must be coupled to another train
Discrimination on the basis of disability — Any distinction, exclusion or restriction on the basis of disability which has the purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, on an equal basis with others, of all human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil or any other field. It includes all forms of discrimination, including denial of reasonable accommodation.
Dispatcher — The dispatcher is an employee of a transport company who sends out trains, buses, trucks, or cars according to a schedule; they control the departure of vehicles according to weather conditions and in the interest of efficient service.
Display — Any dynamic visual device located either in Stations or on the inside/outside of trains for the purpose of informing passengers
Dispute resolution system — In the event of disputes relating to the allocation of infrastructure capacity, 'a dispute resolution system shall be made available in order to resolve such disputes promptly. This system shall be set out in the network statement. If this system is applied, a decision shall be reached within a time limit of 10 working days.'
Disruption — When some disorder on the rail network leads to disruption of the rail services provided by IMs to RUs, and consequently to train services provided by RUs to their customers. It is an unplanned, uncontrolled event disrupting train operations on the network that requires operative treatment of trains. The term in Handbook is not linked to Eurostat/ITF/UNECE definition: "Extensive disruption to traffic" occurs when train services on at least one main railway line are suspended for more than six hours.
Dissemination — The activity of making statistics and statistical analysis accessible to users.
Distance between signboard and phase separation ending — Specific  for  route  compatibility  check  on French network. Distance between the signboard authorizing  the  driver   to  ‘raise  pantograph’  or ‘close the circuit breaker’ after passing the phase separation and the end of the phase separation section.
Distance between track centres — The distance between points of the centre lines of the two tracks under consideration, measured parallel to the running surface of the reference track namely the less canted track.
Distribution channel — The method (such as ticket office machine, on-train media, public web services, telesales, mobile ticketing) by which a service (information, ticket sale, ticket refund, response to complaints, etc.) is provided to the passenger by a railway undertaking (from the TAP glossary). Complementary info : the service can be provided to the passenger by a railway undertaking directly or through a distributor and/or a travel distribution enabler and/or a retailer.
Distribution channel — The method (such as ticket office machine, on-train media, public web services, telesales, mobile ticketing) by which a service (information, ticket sale, ticket refund, response to complaints, etc.) is provided to the passenger by a railway undertaking (from the TAP glossary). Complementary info : the service can be provided to the customer by a railway undertaking directly or through a distributor and/or a travel distribution enabler and/or a retailer.
Distribution system operator — A ‘distribution system operator’ as defined in Article 2, point (29), of Directive (EU) 2019/944:  (`distribution system operator’ means a natural or legal person who is responsible for operating, ensuring the maintenance of and, if necessary, developing the distribution system in a given area and, where applicable, its interconnections with other systems, and for ensuring the long-term ability of the system to meet reasonable demands for the distribution of electricity).
Distributor — An undertaking providing legal and technical capacity to issuers to sell rail products or to provide on line-facilities to customers to buy rail products. Besides, the distributor can offer services to issuers by assembling O-Ds carried out by different carriers into complete journeys as required by the traveller. The distributor may be a carrier
Distributor — Any natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the manufacturer or the importer, who makes a product available on the market.
Distributor — Any natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the manufacturer or the importer, who makes radio equipment available on the market.
Distributor — An undertaking providing legal and technical capacity to issuers to sell  rail products or to provide on line-facilities to customers to buy rail products. Besides, the distributor can offer services to issuers by assembling O-Ds carried out by different carriers into complete journeys as required by the traveller. The distributor may be a carrier (from the TAP glossary)
Distributor — Undertaking providing legal and technical capacity to the issuing undertaking to sell rail tickets or to provide on line-facilities to passengers to buy rail tickets. At the same time the undertaking may be a sales point, attributor, carrier, issuing undertaking and/or ticket control organisation (TCO)
Distributor — As defined in Article 3, point (43), of Regulation (EU) 2018/858: (‘distributor’ means a dealer or any other natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the manufacturer or the importer, who makes available on the market a vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part or equipment).
Disturbance — Disturbance means disorganisation of the railway operation which was previously in a routine and well-ordered state.
Diversionary routes / lines — Routes on which PaPs may be considered temporarily in case of disturbances, e.g. long-lasting major construction works on the principal lines.
Diversity — A means of achieving all or part of the specified requirements in more than one independent and dissimilar manner. (4)
DJ — Djibouti
DK — Denmark
DM — Dominica
DM — Decision-making
DMD — Distribution Message Description
DMI — Driver Machine Interface
DMI — Driver-Machine Interface
DMI — Decision-making indicator
DMP — Decision-making principle
DNS — Domain Name Server
DNS service provider — (a) publicly available recursive domain name resolution services for internet end-users; or (b) authoritative domain name resolution services for third-party use, with the exception of root name servers.
DO — Dominican Republic (the)
Document — Any content whatever its medium (written on paper or stored in electronic form or as a sound, visual or audiovisual recording) concerning a matter relating to the policies, activities and decisions falling within the institution's sphere of responsibility
Document available from the IM with precise description of the tunnel — Electronic  document  available  from  the  IM  stored  by  the Agency  with  precise  description  of  the  clearance  gauge  and geometry  of  the  tunnel
Document management — The process (or procedure) for the identification, creation, maintenance, management, storage and retention of documented information.
Document with restriction related to power consumption of specific electric traction unit(s) — Name   and/or   reference   of   the   document   specifying   the restriction(s)   related   to   power    consumption    of   specific electric traction  unit(s)
Document with restriction related to the position of Multiple Traction unit(s) to comply with contact line separation — Name   and/or   reference   of   the   document   specifying   the restriction(s)   related   to   the   position   of   Multiple   Traction unit(s)  to  comply  with  contact  line  separation
Document with the conditions for the use of eddy current brakes — Electronic  document  available  in  two  EU languages   from   the   IM   stored   by   the Agency  with  conditions  for  the  use  of eddy     current     brakes     identified     in 1.1.1.1.6.2.
Document with the conditions for the use of magnetic brakes — Electronic  document  available  in  two  EU languages   from   the   IM   stored   by   the Agency  with  conditions  for  the  use  of magnetic  brakes  identified  in  1.1.1.1.6.3.
Document with the procedure(s) for static and dynamic route compatibility checks — Electronic  document  available  in  two  EU languages   from   the   IM   stored   by   the Agency with: -  precise  procedures  for  the  static  and dynamic route compatibility checks; Or -  relevant  information  for  carrying  out the checks for specific structures.
Document with the procedure(s) related to the type of train detection systems declared in  1.2.1.1.6.1 — Electronic document  from  the  IM  stored  by  the  Agency  with precise values in accordance with TSI CCS Article13 and the specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [D],  for  the specific  check  to  be  performed  for  train  detection  systems identified  in  1.2.1.1.6.1
Document with the procedure(s) related to the type of train detection systems declared in 1.1.1.3.7.1.2 — Electronic document  from  the  IM  stored  by  the  Agency  with precise values in accordance with TSI CCS Article13 and the specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [D],  for  the specific  check  to  be  performed  for  train  detection  systems identified  in  1.1.1.3.7.1.2.
Document with the transversal section of the particular points requiring specific checks — Electronic  document  available  from  the IM  stored  by  the  Agency  with  the  transversal  section  of  the  particular  points  requiring  specific  checks  due  to  deviations from  gauging  referred  to  in  1.1.1.1.3.1.1. Where  relevant,  guidance  for  the  check with the particular point may be attached to the document with the transversal section.
Document with the transversal section of the particular points requiring specific checks — Electronic  document  available  from  the IM  stored  by  the  Agency  with  the  transversal  section  of  the  particular  points  requiring  specific  checks  due  to  deviations from gauging referred  to in 1.2.1.0.3.4. Where  relevant,  guidance  for  the  check with the particular point may be attached to the document with the transversal section.
Documentation — Parameter without explanation in the document
Documentation — A structured approach to ensure the traceability of all relevant information.
Documentation submitted for authorisation — The file presented by the applicant to the national safety authority at the time of applying for authorisation.
Documents available by the IM relating to braking performance — Electronic  document  available  in  two  EU languages   from   the   IM   stored   by   the Agency  providing  additional  information as  defined  in  point  (2)  of  point  4.2.2.6.2 of TSI OPE.
Documents regarding the rules or restrictions of a strictly local nature available by the IM — Electronic  document  available  from  the IM stored by the Agency providing addit ional information
Domain name system or DNS — A hierarchical distributed naming system which enables the identification of internet services and resources, allowing end-user devices to use internet routing and connectivity services to reach those services and resources.
Domestic journey — A passenger journey by rail whereby a passenger does not cross a border of a Member State
Domestic rail passenger service — A rail passenger service which does not cross a border of a Member State
Domestic sales — The sale of a train ticket for a journey internal to a country, by an issuer which is (one of) the carrier(s) operating the train where the ticket will be used
Domestic section — A section which only involves only one country
Domestic section — A section which only involves one country
Door Release — An external system command which permits the door open command. A release may include mechanical, electromechanical or electronic parts.
Doors and loading facilities — Requirements concerning freight loading doors and hatches, their closing and locking.
Dose rate — The ambient dose equivalent or the directional dose equivalent, as appropriate, per unit time, measured at the point of interest.
Dose-effect relation — The relationship between the value of a noise indicator and a harmful effect.
Dossier — PCS manages requests, offers and all other elements related to international paths in an electronic container called 'Dossier'. The Dossier is the central object of processing in PCS. The Dossier has its own specific parts. Each part contains information related to the path inserted into the Dossier. The management of the Dossier depends on which purpose the Dossier serves. There are various possibilities to use the Dossier. They are different for the individual agents involved in the Dossier. There are also various possible handlings regarding process and agent. A Dossier for one train run can consist of several PCS Dossiers due to administrative reasons.
Double stack wagon — A rail wagon designed for the transport of containers stacked on top of each other.
Double-track — A railway line in which one track is provided for each direction of travel.  A double-track railway usually involves running one track in each direction, compared to a single-track railway where trains in both directions share the same track.
DP — Danger Point
DPF — Derailment prevention function
DQM — Data Quality Management
DQM — Data Quality Management. A common component of the TAP Retail Architecture providing Data Quality Management services to both Resource Producers and Resource consumers. The component performs quality management checks and produces reports to the requester.
Draft amending budget — A proposal made by the Commission to amend certain aspects of the adopted budget of a year, in the course of its implementation
Draft budget — The proposal of the European Commission for an annual financial plan drawn up according to budgetary principles. The Commission integrates in this document the administrative  expenditure requested from all EU institutions, consolidates the document and submits it to the European Parliament and the Council no later than 1 September.
Draft standard — A document containing the text of the technical specifications concerning a given subject, which is being considered for adoption in accordance with the relevant standards procedure, as that document stands after the preparatory work and as circulated for public comment or scrutiny.
Draft technical regulation — The text of a technical specification or other requirement or of a rule on services, including administrative provisions, formulated with the aim of enacting it or of ultimately having it enacted as a technical regulation, the text being at a stage of preparation at which substantial amendments can still be made.
Draft TimeTable / offer (DTT) — Timetable to be prepared by the by IMs/C-OSS no later than four months after the deadline for receipt of requests for capacity to be incorporated into the working timetable.  The aim of the draft offer is to present to the applicants a possible timetable according to which their train can conduct a journey. Infrastructure managers should do their utmost to comply in the draft offer with the initial path request operation concept.
DRAM — Dynamic random access memory
Driver — As defined in Article 3 of Directive 2007/59/EC.
Driver — Any worker in charge of operating a traction unit.
Driver display unit and screens — Functional requirements concerning the information and commands provided in the driver's cab. Excluded: ERTMS (‘European Rail Traffic Management System’) information and commands, including those provided on a display unit, are specified in chapter 12.
Driver identity — Unique code which identifies a train driver.
Driver machine interface — The interface to enable direct communication between the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment and the driver.
Driver Machine Interface (DMI) — Train device to enable communication between the ETCS on-board and the driver.
Driver Machine Interface (DMI) — Train device to enable communication between the ETCS on-board and the driver.
Driver supervision — Requirements concerning the driver's vigilance, e.g. automatic vigilance safety system/deadman's device.
Driver's cab design — Parameter without explanation in the document
Driver's cab emergency exits — Any means for driver's emergency exit or rescue services access to the cab (usually external doors, side windows or emergency hatches); definition of their clearances.
Driver's seat — Requirements concerning the driver's seat (e.g. anthropometric measurements, seat position in order to meet the reference position of eyes for external visibility, ability to escape in case of emergency, ergonomics and health aspects related to the seat's design, adjustability of the seat to enable standing driving position).
Driver/machine interface — Parameter without explanation in the document
Driver’s cab — Compartment of a railway vehicle which is equipped with controls and instruments with which the driver controls the train.
Driving Coach — A coach may be equipped with a driver's cab; such a coach is then named a Driving Coach.
Driving on sight — The driver driving at a speed that allows him to stop the train to avoid obstacles on the track.
Driving time — The duration of the scheduled activity where the driver is in charge of the traction unit, excluding the scheduled time to prepare or shut down that traction unit, but including any scheduled interruptions when the driver remains in charge of the traction unit.
Driving Trailer — Vehicle without traction equipped with a driving cab
Driving trailer or cab car — Trailer car with at least one driver’s cab.
Driving Van — A van may be fitted with a driver's cab and as such is known as a Driving Van.
Drum — A flat-ended or convex-ended cylindrical packaging made out of metal, fibreboard, plastics, plywood or other suitable materials. This definition also includes packagings of other shapes, e.g. round, taper-necked packagings or pail-shaped packagings. Wooden barrels and jerricans are not covered by this definition.
Dry port — Inland terminal which is directly linked to a maritime port.
DSB — Danske Statsbaner – Danish Railways
DSC function — Data Search and Consultation function
DST — Digitally Signed Ticket - one of the possible methods for implementation of home printing according to B.7
DTP — Desktop publishing
Dual cab engine — Rolling Stock unit fitted with two driving cabs and one single ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment.
Dual-use infrastructure — A transport network infrastructure that addresses both civilian and defence needs.
Dump — Sequence of hexadecimal values representing data or messages exactly as they are stored or transmitted in an IT system; each hexadecimal value represents 4 bits
Durable medium — Any instrument which enables the traveller or the trader to store information addressed personally to him in a way accessible for future reference for a period of time adequate for the purposes of the information and which allows the unchanged reproduction of the information stored;
Dust explosion — It can happen if a high enough dust concentration exists in an oxidising atmosphere. The reaction of combustion happens at the interface gas/solid and the intensity of the explosion depends directly on the area of reaction, that is to say the particle size. They can principally cause overpressure effects and missiles projection.
Duty holder — Any individual or legal entity responsible for the risk, which he imports onto the network, i.e. the RU.
DV — Difference Value between the Permitted Speed to e.g.  DV_EBImin Emergency Brake Intervention speed (minimum). DV_EBImax Emergency Brake Intervention speed (maximum)
Dwell Time — Time during which a train is stopped at a Stopping Point, it means the time period between wheel stop and wheel start.
Dwell time / Dwelling time — The period of a time that a train or  railway vehicle remain at a scheduled stop (location, border station, etc) without moving beyond this location.Dwell time in train operation consists of  procedures time and waiting time.
DWT — Deadweight
Dynamic brake linked to traction — Acceptance and requirements of emergency braking under use of dynamic brake which is linked to the traction system, e.g. requirements to the availability, constraints, etc.
Dynamic braking command — Requirements concerning the dynamic braking command, e.g. possibility of independent and/or combined use of the dynamic brake from/with other brake systems, the possibility to inhibit the application of the regenerative brake.
Dynamic data — Data that change often or on a regular basis.
Dynamic friction coefficient — Coefficient of friction achieved by the friction material during relative movement between the friction material surface and wheel tread.
Dynamic lateral force — The sum of dynamic forces exerted by a wheelset on the track in lateral direction.
Dynamic prices — Yield managed fares, where the fare for a same ticket at a given moment can assume any value between a minimum and a maximum, according to algorithms based on many commercial factors
Dynamic purchasing system — A completely electronic process for making commonly used purchases of items generally available on the market.
Dynamic speed profile — The speed / distance profile that a train may follow without violating the static speed profile and/or the EOA/LOA.
DZ — Algeria
D_NVOVTRP — Maximum  distance  for  overriding  the  train  trip  in  metres. According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
D_NVROLL — Parameter   used   by   the   ETCS   on-board   to   supervise   the distance allowed to be travelled under the roll-away protection and  the  reverse  movement  protection,  in  metres. According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
e-ticket — Ticket held as an electronic data record capable of being transformed into legible written symbols. Several data records form a single contract when then they are issued to be a single (through) ticket in accordance with the GTV-CIT
EA — European Co-Operation for Accreditation
EA — European co-operation for Accreditation (http://www.european-accreditation.org)
EA — European Co-Operation for Accreditation
EA MLA — EA Multi-Lateral agreement
EA Multi-Lateral agreement (EA MLA) — The agreement signed between the EA accreditation body members to recognise the equivalence, reliability and therefore acceptance of accredited certifications, inspections, calibration certificates and test reports across Europe.
EAC — European Association for Cooperation
EAEC — European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom)
EAFRD — European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development
EAGF — European Agricultural Guarantee Fund
EAGGF — European Agricultural Guidance and Guarantee Fund
EAR — European Agency for Reconstruction (end of mandate: 31.12.2008)
Earmarked revenue — Revenue earmarked for a specific purpose, such as income from foundations, subsidies, gifts and bequests, including the earmarked revenue specific to each institution (Article 21 of the  financial regulation)
Earmarking — Tying revenues received to a specific use (e.g. financing road network expansion).
Earthing — Parameter without explanation in the document
Earthworks — Soil structures and soil-retaining structures that are subject to railway traffic loading.
EAS — European Administrative School (now EUSA)
EASA — European Union Aviation Safety Agency
EASO — European Asylum Support Office (replaced by the European Union Agency for Asylum – EUAA)
EA (MLA) — EA Multi-Lateral agreement
EA (MLA) — EA Multi-Lateral agreement
EB — Emergency Braking
EBA — European Banking Authority
EBCL — Emergency Brake Confidence Level
EBD — Emergency Brake Deceleration Curve
EBI — Emergency Brake Intervention supervision limit
EBRD — European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EC — European Commission
EC — European Community
EC — European Commission (http://ec.europa.eu/index_en)
EC — Ecuador
EC — European Community/Communities (ceased on 1 December 2009 – date of entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon)
EC (EU) — European Commision
EC certificate of conformity — The certificate delivered for an interoperability constituent by the notified body of the conformity of an interoperability constituent, considered in isolation, with the Union technical specifications to be met.
EC certificate of suitability for use — The certificate delivered for an interoperability constituent by the notified body of the suitability for use of an interoperability constituent considered within its railway environment.
EC certificate of verification — The certificate delivered for a subsystem by the notified body regarding solely the verification of conformity with relevant TSIs.
EC declaration of conformity — The declaration established for an interoperability constituent by the manufacturer or its authorised representative in which the manufacturer or its authorised representative declares on its sole responsibility that the interoperability constituent concerned, which has been subject to the relevant verification procedures, complies with the relevant Union law.
EC declaration of suitability for use — The supplementary declaration to the ‘EC’ declaration of conformity of the interoperability constituent established for an interoperability constituent by the manufacturer or its authorised representative in which the manufacturer or its authorised representative declares on its sole responsibility that the interoperability constituent concerned, which has been subject to the relevant verification procedures, satisfies the requirements for suitability for use specified in the relevant TSI.
EC declaration of verification — For a subsystem, the ‘EC’ declaration of verification established pursuant to Article 18 and Annex V to Directive 2008/57/EC which is a declaration that the subsystem satisfies the requirements of the relevant European legislation including any national rules that are used to implement the essential requirements of Directive 2008/57/EC.
EC declaration of verification — The declaration established for a subsystem by the applicant in which the applicant declares on its sole responsibility that the subsystem concerned, which has been subject to the relevant verification procedures, satisfies the requirements of the relevant Union law and any relevant national rules.
EC declaration of verification for siding relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to infrastructure subsystem — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EC declaration of verification for track relating to compliance with the requirements from technical specifications for  interoperability (TSIs) applicable to infrastructure subsystem — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250 (1).
EC declaration of verification for track relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to control,  command signalling subsystem — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EC declaration of verification for track relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to energy subsystem — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EC declaration of verification for track relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to infrastructure subsystem — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EC declaration of verification for tunnel relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to railway tunnel — Unique number for EC declarations in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EC verification — The procedure referred to in Article 18 of Directive 2008/57/EC whereby a notified body checks and certifies that the subsystem complies with Directive 2008/57/EC, relevant TSI(s) and with the other regulations deriving from the Treaty, and may be put into operation.
ECA — 1. European Court of Auditors 2. do not use for European Chemicals Agency; see ECHA
ECB — European Central Bank
ECCM — European Common Criteria for Maintenance
ECDC — European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (same abbreviation in all languages; do not use ECDPC)
ECDIN — Environmental chemicals data and information network
ECE — Economic Commission for Europe (regional ECOSOC commission)
ECG — Electro Cardiogram
ECHA — European Chemicals Agency
ECHO — 1. Directorate-General for European Civil Protection and Humanitarian Aid Operations (ECHO) (see also Section 9.6 ‘Commission directorates-general and services: official titles’) 2. European Commission host organisation (former Commission database server)
ECIP — EC International Investment Partners
ECM — Entity in Charge of Maintenance
ECM — Entity in Charge of Maintenance
ECM — See "Entity in charge of maintenance".
ECM - F1 — Management function
ECM - F2 — Maintenance Development function
ECM - F3 — Fleet Maintenance Management function
ECM - F4 — Maintenance Delivery function
ECM - F1 — Management function
ECM - F2 — Maintenance Development function
ECM - F3 — Fleet Maintenance Management function
ECM - F4 — Maintenance Delivery function
Economic operator — Any natural or legal person, including a public entity, or a group of such persons, who offers to supply products, execute works or provide services or supply immovable property.
Economic operators — The manufacturer, the authorised representative, the importer and the distributor.
ECOS — European city cooperation system
ECOSOC — Economic and Social Council (UN)
ECOSOC — United Nations Economic and Social Council
ECSC — European Coal and Steel Community (ceased on 24 July 2002 – date of expiration of the ECSC Treaty)
ECU — European currency unit (used as a monetary symbol, lower case when used as a word); replaced by the euro on 1 January 1999 (see also Section 7.3.1)
EDA — European Defence Agency
Eddy current track brake — Requirements on eddy current track brakes, e.g. allowed application cases, limitations to its operation.
EDF — European Development Fund (Objective 1, Objective 5a, etc.)
EDI — Electronic data interchange
Edifact — Electronic data interchange for administration, commerce and transport
EDPS — European Data Protection Supervisor
EE — Estonia
EEA — European Economic Area
EEA — 1. European Economic Area 2. European Environment Agency
EEAS — European External Action Service
EEC — European Economic Community
EEC — European Economic Community (see EC)
EEIG — European Economic Interest Group.
EEIG — European Economic Interest Group
EEIG — European Economic Interest Grouping
EESC — European Economic and Social Committee
EFCA — European Fisheries Control Agency (until 31.12.2012: ‘Community Fisheries Control Agency’ (CFCA))
Effect — See “Impact”.
Effect distance — The estimated distance, counted from the location of the source of the hazardous areas, to which the considered hazard has a predefined effect on the considered vulnerability.
Effectiveness of a safety barrier — The effectiveness is the ability for a technical safety barrier to perform a safety function for the duration of an undesired event, in a non- degraded mode, for a pre-specified set of circumstances. The effectiveness is either a percentage or a probability of that the defined safety function will perform as intended. If the effectiveness is expressed as a percentage, it may vary during the operating time of the safety barrier. For example, a valve that does not completely close on demand would not have an effectiveness of 100%.
Effects of DC content in AC supply — Vehicle requirements related to the maximum DC component in AC power supply.
Efficiency — Generally used here to mean efficient allocation of scarce resources, in the broad sense. At the margin, resources should be used by the individual who is willing to pay the most for them (i.e. marginal social cost equals marginal social benefit).
EFICS — European forestry information and communication system
EFSA — European Food Safety Authority
EFTA — European Free Trade Association (http://www.efta.int)
EFTA — European Free Trade Association (Stockholm Convention)
EFTA States — The Iceland, the Principality of Liechtenstein and the Kingdom of Norway.
EG — ATO Engaged
EG — Egypt
EGF — European Globalisation Adjustment Fund
EH — Western Sahara*
Ehlass — European home and leisure accident surveillance system
EI — Existing infrastructure (fixed installations) that are not subject to the ‘EC’ verification procedure.
EI — European Instructions
EI certificate of demonstration — The document issued by an independent assessor as a result of the EI demonstration of compliance.
EI declaration of demonstration — The document issued by an applicant after receiving the EI certificate of demonstration.
EI declaration of demonstration (as defined Commission 2014/881/EU (2)) for track relating to compliance with the requiremetns from TSIs applicable to infrastructure subsystem — Unique number for EI declarations following the same format requirements as specified  for EC declarations in Annex VII of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EI declaration of demonstration (as defined Recommendation 2014/881/EU) for track relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to energy subsystem — Unique number for EI declarations following the same format requirements as specified  for EC declarations in Annex VII of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EI declaration of demonstration (as defined Recommendation 2014/881/EU) for tunnel relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to railway tunnel — Unique number for EI declarations following the same format requirements as specified  for EC declarations in Annex VII of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EI declaration of demonstration (as defined Recommendation 2014/881/EU) relating to compliance with the requirements from TSIs applicable to  infrasctructure subsystem — Unique number for EI declarations following the same format requirements as specified  for EC declarations in Annex VII of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/250.
EI demonstration of compliance — The verification of whether the basic parameters of a subsystem and/or an element of existing lines comply with the requirements of the relevant TSIs.
EIB — European Investment Bank
EICs — Euro Info Centres
EIF — European Investment Fund
Eight disciplines (of problem solving) 8D — Team-oriented and systematic approach defining a sequence of steps to resolve problems in products, services and processes. Note 1 to entry: Its purpose is to identify, correct and eliminate recurring problems. Note 2 to entry: The 8D problem solving model establishes a corrective action based on the analysis of the problem and focuses on the origin of the problem by determining its root causes. Note 3 to entry: The 8D model can be reduced to four steps (4D).
EIM — European Rail Infrastructure Managers
EIN — European identification number
EIN — European identification member
EIN — European informatics network
Einecs — European inventory of existing commercial chemical substances
EIOPA — European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
EIRENE — European Integrated Railway Radio Enhanced Network
EIRENE — European Integrated Radio Enhanced Network
el — Greek
ELA — European Labour Authority
Elasticity — Proportional change in demand in response to a price increase or decrease (price elasticity); or reaction in total demand after an increase/decrease in income (income elasticity).
Electric and/or Diesel Multiple Unit — Trainset in which all vehicles are capable of carrying a payload (passengers or luggage/mail or freight).
Electric multiple unit (EMU) — electrically powered MU.
Electric vehicle — A motor vehicle equipped with a powertrain containing at least one non-peripheral electric machine as energy converter with an electric rechargeable energy storage system, which can be recharged externally.
Electrical power supply and traction system — Parameter without explanation in the document
Electrified line — An electrified line with a least one track electrified.
Electrified track — Track provided with an overhead catenary or a conductor rail to permit electric traction. The following types of electric current are in use: AC   25 000 Volts, 50 Hz 15 000 Volts, 16 2/3 Hz DC 3 000 Volts 1 500 Volts 750 Volts 660 Volts 630 Volts.
Electro-magnetic fields/Induced voltages in the track/under the vehicle — The electro-magnetic fields (or induced/interference voltages) at the location of railway equipment (axle counter detectors, ATP (‘Automatic Train Protection’), antennas, hot axle box detectors, etc.).
Electro-magnetic fields/Induced voltages outside the track — The electro-magnetic fields (or induced/interference voltages) with shunting radios, vehicle radio frequency telecommunication systems (e.g. national radio or GSM-R (‘Global System for Mobile communications - Railways’), etc.
Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC) — Parameter without explanation in the document
Electromagnetic disturbance — Electromagnetic disturbance as defined in point 5 of Article 3(1) of Directive 2014/30/EU.
Electronic communications network — A transmission system, whether or not based on a permanent infrastructure or centralised administration capacity, and, where applicable, switching or routing equipment and other resources, including network elements which are not active, which permit the conveyance of signals by wire, radio, optical or other electromagnetic means, including satellite networks, fixed (circuit- and packet-switched including internet) and mobile terrestrial networks, electricity cable systems, to the extent that they are used for the purpose of transmitting signals, networks used for radio and television broadcasting, and cable television networks, irrespective of the type of information conveyed.
Electronic communications service — An electronic communications service as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972.
Electronic document — Any content stored in electronic form, in particular text or sound, visual or audiovisual recording.
Electronic freight transport information or Efti — The electronic ‘freight transport information’ as defined in Article 3, point (4) of Regulation (EU) 2020/1056 of the European Parliament and of the Council (36).
Electronic identification — The process of using person identification data in electronic form uniquely representing either a natural or legal person, or a natural person representing a legal person.
Electronic identification means — A material and/or immaterial unit containing person identification data and which is used for authentication for an online service.
Electronic identification scheme — A system for electronic identification under which electronic identification means are issued to natural or legal persons, or natural persons representing legal persons.
Electronic registered delivery service — A service that makes it possible to transmit data between third parties by electronic means and provides evidence relating to the handling of the transmitted data, including proof of sending and receiving the data, and that protects transmitted data against the risk of loss, theft, damage or any unauthorised alterations.
Electronic seal — Data in electronic form, which is attached to or logically associated with other data in electronic form to ensure the latter’s origin and integrity.
Electronic seal creation data — Unique data, which is used by the creator of the electronic seal to create an electronic seal.
Electronic seal creation device — Configured software or hardware used to create an electronic seal.
Electronic signature — Data in electronic form which is attached to or logically associated with other data in electronic form and which is used by the signatory to sign.
Electronic signature creation data — Unique data which is used by the signatory to create an electronic signature.
Electronic signature creation device — Configured software or hardware used to create an electronic signature.
Electronic time stamp — Data in electronic form which binds other data in electronic form to a particular time establishing evidence that the latter data existed at that time.
Element of construction or interoperability Iconstituent — An elementary component, group of components, complete assembly or subassembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of rail systems depends directly or indirectly, including both tangible objects and intangible objects.
EMA — European Medicines Agency (formerly ‘European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products’, EMEA)
EMC — Electromagnetic Compatibility
EMC — Electro Magnetic Compatibility
EMC between the vehicle and the environment — Parameter without explanation in the document
EMC between the vehicle and the railway system — Parameter without explanation in the document
EMC within the vehicle — Conducted emission and immunity levels to on-board apparatus, magnetic field for human exposure inside rolling stock (e.g. human exposure limits).
EMCDDA — European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
EMEA — (See EMA)
Emergency — Parameter without explanation in the document
Emergency braking — Application of a predefined brake force in the shortest time in order to stop the train with a defined level of brake performance.
Emergency braking command — Requirements concerning the emergency braking command, e.g. availability of independent emergency brake command devices, specification of appearance of emergency brake command devices, ability of self-locking of the emergency brake command devices, ability of activation of an emergency brake by the control-command and signalling on-board system, specification of the emergency brake after activation.
Emergency braking performance — Requirements concerning the emergency braking performance, e.g. response time, deceleration, stopping distance, modes to be considered (normal/degraded). Excluded: exploitation of wheel rail adhesion (see parameter 4.6.1 - Limit of wheel rail adhesion profile).
Emergency call — Call set up in some dangerous situations to warn all trains /shunting compositions in a defined area.
Emergency exit — Train borne provision to allow people inside the train to get out of the train in case of an emergency. An external passenger door is a specific type of emergency exit.
Emergency lighting — Requirements for the emergency lighting system, e.g. for minimum operating time, lighting level/luminosity.
Emergency procedure — A predefined set of methods and responsibilities for responding to urgent situations in order to prevent a major impact on the Commission.
Emergency propelling area — Area where propelling movements in RV are allowed.
Emergency running capabilities — Measures for running capability of passenger rolling stock with a fire on board. Excluded: emergency brake override handled in parameter 10.2.3 (Passenger alarm).
Emergency stop order — ETCS order braking a train with the maximum brake force until the train is at a standstill.
Emergency temperature — The temperature at which emergency procedures shall be implemented in the event of loss of temperature control.
EMI — Electromagnetic Interference
EMI — European Monetary Institute
Employee or contractor — Any person whose employment is in connection with a railway and is at work at the time of the accident, including the staff of contractors, self-employed contractors, the crew of the train and persons handling rolling stock and infrastructure installations.
EMS — On-board Energy Measurement System
EMS — European Monetary System
EMSA — European Maritime Safety Agency
EMU — Economic and monetary union (Stage I, Stage II, etc.)
EN — European standard
EN — European Norm
EN — Euro-norm
EN — European Norm
en — English
EN Line Category — The result of the classification process set out in the specification referenced in Appendix T, Index [2] and referred to in that standard as ‘Line Category’. It represents the ability of the infrastructure to withstand the vertical loads imposed by vehicles on the line or section of line for regular (‘normal’) service.
EN standard — A European standard published by the European Committee of Standardization (CEN) (CEN, Avenue Marnix 17, B-1000 Brussels).
Encryption — Encoding of messages Decryption: converting encrypted data back into original form
Encryption — The encoding of data
Encryption — The process of transforming information (referred to as plaintext) using an algorithm (called a cipher) to make it unreadable to anyone except those possessing special knowledge, usually referred to as a key. The result of the process is encrypted information (in cryptography, referred to as ciphertext).
End coupling — Is the mechanical interface between units forming a train.
End coupling (external coupling) of units — The coupling device used to couple together two (or several) units to form a train. An end coupling can be ‘automatic’, ‘semi-automatic’ or ‘manual’. An end coupling can be used for rescue purpose (see clause 4.2.2.2.4). In the context of this TSI, a ‘Manual’ coupling is an end coupling system which requires (one or several) person(s) to stand between the units to be coupled or uncoupled for the mechanical coupling of these units.
End Of Authority — Location up to which a train or a shunting composition is authorised to proceed.
End of Authority — Location to which the train is permitted to proceed and where target speed = zero.
End Of Authority (EOA) — Location to which an ETCS train is authorised to proceed and where the target speed is zero.
End of authority passed without permission — An end of authority passed without permission is any occasion when a train proceeds beyond the end of authority in the following circumstances: - A trackside signal at danger, or an order to STOP where an ATP is not operational, - The end of a movement authority provided in an ATP, - A point communicated by verbal or written authorisation laid down in Regulations, - Stop boards, - Hand signals. This covers movement authority as described in ETCS and authority to move covered by instructions/signalling. Any case in which a vehicle without any traction unit attached or a train that is unattended runs away is not included.
End of loop marker — Information transmitted by a balise group intended to mark the beginning of a track area where loop messages can be received. In bidirectional applications, it is possible to have an EOLM at both sides of a loop.
End of movement authority — Location to which the train is permitted to proceed according to an MA. When transmitting an MA, it is the end of the last section given in the MA.
End of tunnel — Geographical  coordinates  in  decimal  degrees  and  km  of  the  line  at  the  end  of a tunnel.
End of year transfer — The “end of year transfer” concerns differentiated payment appropriations. It is intended to ensure that, insofar as possible, the outstanding invoices related to funds in shared management can be honoured, by making full use of available payment appropriations at the end of the budgetary year. While the sources can come from any part of the budget lines, they can only be used to cover pending payments in shared management (in particular agriculture and cohesion policy).
End user — A natural or legal person purchasing an alternative fuel for direct use in a vehicle.
End-of-train signal — Requirements concerning equipment which can display a visual end-of-train signal (e.g. red lights). Excluded: brackets for mounting end-of-train signals, see parameter 7.2.4 (Brackets).
ENE — Energy (TSI)
ENE — Energy
ENEA — European Nuclear Energy Agency
ENEL — IT: Ente nazionale energia elettrica
Energy — The electrification system, including overhead lines and the trackside electricity consumption measuring and charging system.
Energy consumption measurement — Parameter without explanation in the document
Energy efficiency first — Energy efficiency first as defined in Article 2, point (18), of Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.
Energy supply system (Voltage and frequency) — Indication  of  the  traction  supply  system (nominal voltage and frequency)
Engine — Association of one or two driving cab(s) of a Rolling Stock unit with one single ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment. When a driving cab of the engine is used to lead a train/shunting consist, the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment supervises the movement of the train/shunting consist the engine belongs to. Each driving cab of an engine allows the driver communicating with the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment through the DMI.
Engine Orientation — If there is an active cab, this one defines the orientation of the engine, i.e. the side of the active cab is considered as determining the front of the engine.
ENIAC — European Nanoelectronics Initiative Advisory Council
ENISA — European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
Enterprise — Any natural person, any legal person, whether profit-making or not, any association or group of persons without legal personality, whether profit-making or not, or any official body, whether it has legal personality itself or is dependent upon an authority that has such personality.
Enterprise — A natural or legal person engaged in an economic activity, irrespective of its legal form, including partnerships or associations regularly engaged in an economic activity.
Entity — A commercial organisation operating and/or selling train services at IRT fares, designated under a specific brand. An entity can be a carrier (e.g. Eurostar), a business unit created by multiple carriers (e.g. Thalys) or a business unit created by a single carrier (e.g. AVE)
Entity — Grouping of railway undertakings which make a joint train service offer
Entity — A natural or legal person created and recognised as such under the national law of its place of establishment, which may, acting under its own name, exercise rights and be subject to obligations.
Entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) — An entity in charge of maintenance of a vehicle, and registered as such in the national vehicle register.
Entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) — The entity in accordance with the Uniform Rules concerning the Technical Admission of Railway Material used in International Traffic (ATMF – Appendix G to COTIF) and certified in accordance with Annex A thereto, that is in charge of the maintenance of a wagon. NOTE: With respect to elements related to entities in charge of maintenance (ECM) and their certification, Appendix G to COTIF (ATMF), is harmonised with European legislation, particularly Directive (EU) 2016/798 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on railway safety (Article 14 points 1 to 5) and Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 May 2016 on the interoperability of the rail system within the European Union (Article 47 point 3 letter f). With respect to the system on certification of entities in charge of maintenance, Annex A to ATMF is equivalent to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/779 of 16 May 2019 laying down detailed provisions on a system of certification of entities in charge of maintenance of vehicles pursuant to Directive (EU) 2016/798 of the European Parliament and of the Council and repealing Commission Regulation (EU) No 445/2011.
Entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) — An entity in charge of maintenance as defined in point (20) of Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
Entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) — An entity in charge of the maintenance of a vehicle, and registered as such in a vehicle register referred to in Article 47 of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Entity in charge of maintenance (ECM) — An entity in charge of maintenance of a vehicle, and registered as such in the national vehicle register.(ECM regulation)
Entity managing the change — The holder of the vehicle type authorisation, the keeper or the entity entrusted by them.
Entity providing domain name registration services — A registrar or an agent acting on behalf of registrars, such as a privacy or proxy registration service provider or reseller.
Entrance signal — A main signal, intended for trains entering a station.
Envireg — Regional action programme on the initiative of the Commission concerning the environment
Environmental charge — A charge (obligation to pay) which is asked for the aim of combating damage to the environment (for example: climate change, air pollution, municipal and hazardous waste, chemicals, noise, ozone depleting substances and emissions from the transport and energy supply sectors).
Environmental conditions — Parameter without explanation in the document
Environmental conditions and aerodynamic effects — Parameter without explanation in the document
Environmental conditions impacting on the vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
Environmental costs — All damages caused by environmental nuisances (health costs, material damages, biosphere damages, long-term risks).
Environmental damage — This dangerous phenomenon results from dispersion of a substance identified as dangerous to the environment in sufficient consequences to effect the natural environment. It can also result from an emission of toxic vapours from the combustion of certain substances.
Environmental effectiveness — Benefit/Improvement to the environment that a given policy response generates, considered separately from the economic costs that may result from implementing the policy.
Environmental impact assessment test — Measurement performed for collecting data to be used in a prediction method for environmental assessment.
Environmental noise — Unwanted or harmful outdoor sound created by human activities, including noise emitted by means of transport, road traffic, rail traffic, air traffic, and from sites of industrial activity such as those defined in Annex I to Council Directive 96/61/EC of 24 September 1996 concerning integrated pollution prevention and control.
Environmental restrictions — Restrictions which are applied in order to protect the environment, for example limits on car emissions, noise limits near railway stations, roads and airports, protected land areas (where certain types of transport infrastructure are not allowed to be built), etc.
EOA — End Of Authority
EOA — End of Authority
EOLM — End-of-Loop-Marker
EOTC — European Organisation for Testing and Certification
Ep — Electro-pneumatic
EP — European Parliament
EPA — Environment Protection Agency
EPO — 1. European Patent Office 2. European Patent Organisation
EPOS — 1. Electronic point-of-sale 2. European pool of studies (and analyses)
EPPPS — Externally provided processes, products and services
EPSC — European Political Strategy Centre (see also Section 9.6 ‘Commission directorates-general and services: official titles’)
EPSO — European Personnel Selection Office
Equipment and other facilities on-board for staff — Parameter without explanation in the document
Equipment to the windscreen — E.g. de-icing, de-misting, external cleaning devices, sun protection, etc.
Equipped line — Line equipped with ERTMS/ ETCS in application level 1 or 2
Equity — Criterion that may entail modifying a political decision so as to achieve a particular distribution of incomes in the economy through, for instance, subsidies to public transport for lowincome groups or to achieve regional development objectives.
Equity investment — The provision of capital to a company, invested directly or indirectly in return for total or partial ownership of that company and where the equity investor may assume some management control of the company and may share the company’s profits.
Equivalence — Is to be understood as “having the same or a similar effect” as per the definition of Collins dictionary: Equivalent, adjective 1. Equal or interchangeable in value, quantity, significance, etc. 2. Having the same or a similar effect or meaning.
Equivalent conicity — Requirements concerning equivalent conicity values which should be respected.
Equivalent conicity — The tangent of the cone angle of a wheelset with coned wheels whose lateral movement has the same kinematic wavelength as the given wheelset on straight track and large-radius curves.
Equivalent isotropically radiated power (e.i.r.p.) — The product of the power supplied to the antenna and the absolute or isotropic gain in a given direction relative to an isotropic antenna.
ER — Eritrea
ERA — European Union Agency for Railways also called “the Agency”
ERA — European Union Agency for Railways (scheme owner)
ERA — European Union Agency for Railways
ERA — European Railway Agency (also referred to as Agency)
ERA — See European Railway Agency
ERA — European Railway Agency
ERA — European Railway Agency (http://www.era.europa.eu)
ERA — European Railway Agency - A community agency created on 20th April 2004 by a EC Regulation. It has 2 missions: Railway safety and Railway Interoperability
ERA — European Railway Agency. According to Regulation (EC) No 881/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency.
ERA — European Railway Agency (replaced by the European Union Agency for Railways on 15.6.2016)
ERA Vocabulary — A Technical Document issued by the Agency pursuant to Article 4(8) of Directive (EU) 2016/797, establishing human and machine readable data definitions and presentations and linked quality and accuracy requirements for each data element (ontology) of the rail system.
ERADIS — Interoperability and Safety database managed by the European Union Agency for railways
ERADIS — European Railway Agency Database of Interoperability and Safety
ERADIS ID — The alphanumeric code used to identify an ‘EC’ declaration of conformity or suitability for use of interoperability constituent or an ‘EC’ declaration of verification of subsystem and which is established in accordance with Annex VII.
Erasmus — Action scheme for the mobility of university students
ERATV — European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles
ERATV — European Register of Authorised Typesof Vehicles
ERATV — European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles, as referred to in Article 48 of Directive (EU) 2016/797
ERATV — European register of authorised types of vehicles (ERATV)
ERATV — European register of authorised types of vehicles referred to in Article 34 of Interoperability Directive (Commission Implementing Decision 2011/665/EU)
ERDF — European Regional Development Fund
Ergonomic aspects of DMI — Ergonomic DMI requirements for the set of specifications No 1 in Table A2 of the Annex A to the CCS TSI laid down in Decision 2012/88/EU.
ERICA — European Research Institute for Consumer Affairs
ERM — Exchange rate mechanism
ERMES — European radio messaging system
ERRI — European Railways Research Institute
Error — Transmitted or published data that do not correspond to the given authorisation for type of vehicle. Modification of authorisation does not fall under this definition.
ERTMS — European Rail Traffic Management System
ERTMS — European Rail Traffic Management System
ERTMS — See European rail traffic management system
ERTMS error corrections required for the on-board — List of unacceptable errors impacting the IM network that are required  to  be  solved  in  the  on-board  according  to  the  TSI CCS  point  7.2.10.3  specification  maintenance  point
ERTMS/ATO — The ATO part of ERTMS
ERTMS/ETCS — The ETCS part of ERTMS
ERTMS/ETCS ON-BOARD EQUIPMENT — The part (software and/or hardware) of the on-board equipment, which fulfils the ERTMS/ETCS specification.
ERTMS/FRMCS — The FRMCS part of ERTMS
ERTMS/GSM-R — The GSM-R part of ERTMS
ES — Spain
es — Spanish
ESA — 1. European Space Agency 2. European system of integrated economic accounts 3. Euratom Supply Agency
ESAF — Enhanced structural adjustment facility
ESC — ETCS System Compatibility
ESC — Economic and Social Committee (now EESC)
ESCB — European System of Central Banks
ESF — European Social Fund
ESM — European Stability Mechanism (http://www.esm.europa.eu/)
ESMA — European Securities and Markets Authority
ESO — European Standardisation Organisation
Essential functions of infrastructure management — Decision-making concerning train path allocation, including both the definition and the assessment of availability and the allocation of individual train paths, and decision-making concerning infrastructure charging, including determination and collection of charges, in accordance with the charging framework and the capacity allocation framework established by the Member States pursuant to Articles 29 and 39.
Essential requirements — All the conditions set out in Annex III to Directive 2008/57/EC which must be met by the trans-European rail system, the subsystems, and the Interoperability Constituents including interfaces.
Essential requirements — All the conditions set out in Annex III of Directive (EU) 2016/797 which must be met by the Union rail system, the subsystems, and the interoperability constituents, including interfaces.
Essential requirements — All the conditions set out in the relevant UTP, which must be met by the rail system, the subsystems and the interoperability constituents, including interfaces.
Essential service — A service which is crucial for the maintenance of vital societal functions, economic activities, public health and safety, or the environment.
Essentially flat surface — Surface whose irregularity from a plane does not exceed ± 1 mm.
Establishment — Establishment as defined in point 5 of Article 4 of Directive 2006/123/EC;
Establishment of technical compatibility with the network — Verification and documentation in the technical file accompanying the EC declaration of verification of the vehicle type's parameters that are relevant for the technical compatibility with the given network and, where applicable, conformity with the limit values specified for this network; the parameters include physical characteristics and functions; the verification needs to be done according to the rules applicable for the given network.
Estimated position — The position the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment estimates the train front is at, with the highest probability according to the physical characteristics of the train and to the odometer working conditions. It is expressed as a distance from a location reference detected by the on-board.
Estimated speed — The speed the odometer estimates the train is running at, with the highest probability according to the physical characteristics of the train and to the odometer working conditions
Estimated Time of Arrival (ETA) — 'Estimated Time of Arrival of wagons at the customer side.' The ETI/ETA calculation is based on the information from the infrastructure manager in charge, which sends, within the Train Running Forecast message, the Train Estimated Time of Arrival (TETA) for defined reporting points (in any case for handover, interchange, or arrival points including Intermodal terminals) on the agreed train path e.g. for the handover point from one IM to the next IM (in this case TETA is equal to ETH).
Estimated Time of Handover (ETH) — Estimated Time of Handover of a train from one IM to another.'
Estimated Time of Interchange (ETI) — Estimated Time of Interchange of wagons from one RU to another.'
ET — Ethiopia
et — Estonian
ETA — Estimated Time of Arrival (at destination). The estimated time of arrival (ETA) is the time when the train is expected to arrive at a certain place. Estimates can be based on production plans (predictions) and/or stochastic computation.
ETA — The Estimated time of arrival (of the train at the station)
ETCS — European Train Control System
ETCS baseline — ETCS baseline installed lineside.
ETCS error corrections required for the on-board — List of unacceptable errors impacting the IM network that are required  to  be  solved  in  the  on-board  according  to  the  TSI CCS  point  7.2.10.3  specification  maintenance  point
ETCS ID — ETCS Identity
ETCS Identity — The ETCS identity of an on-board equipment is made of a single identity number. The ETCS identity of an RBC, balise group, loop or RIU is composed of a country/region identity number and of an identity number within the country/region.
ETCS infill installed line-side — Information    about    installed    trackside equipment capable to transmit infill information by loop or Global System for Mobile  communications  for  Railways  (GSM-R) for level 1 installations.
ETCS infill necessary for line access — Indication whether infill is required to access the line for safety reasons.
ETCS level for degraded situation — ERTMS/ETCS   application   level   for   degraded  situation  related  to  the  track  side equipment.
ETCS Location Marker — Harmonised trackside ETCS marker board defined in EN 16494/2015 ((2)) used to identify a potential EOA, e.g. the end of a block section.
ETCS location marker — Harmonised trackside ETCS signal defined in [2] used to identify a potential EOA, e.g. the end of a block section.
ETCS M_version — ETCS  M_version  according  to the  specification referenced in Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
ETCS national packet 44 application implemented — Indication whether data for national applications is transmitted between track and train.
ETCS on-board — The part of ETCS installed on a railway vehicle.
ETCS operational train category — Set of technical and/or operational characteristics of a train to which a specific ETCS speed profile applies.
ETCS operational train category — Set of technical and / or operational characteristics of a train to which a specific ETCS speed profile applies.
ETCS Stop Marker — Harmonised trackside ETCS marker board defined in EN 16494/2015 used to:  - identify a potential EOA, and - indicate the location where a driver has to stop the train, if running without an MA.
ETCS stop marker — Harmonised trackside ETCS signal defined in [2] used to:       identify a potential EOA and,       indicate the location where a train running without an MA has to stop.
ETCS system compatibility — ETCS  requirements  used  for  demonstrating technical compatibility
ETCS System Compatibility (ESC) — It  is the recording of technical compatibility between ETCS on-board and the trackside parts ETCS of the CCS subsystems within an area of use
ETCS system version 2.2 or 3.0 func tionalities to be required in the next 5 years — List  of  ETCS  system  version  2.2  or  3.0  functionalities  to  be required   in   the   next   5   years   according   to   TSI   CCS point  6.1.1.2  and  Appendix  G
ETCS trackside implements level crossing procedure or an equivalent solution — If  the  trackside  does  not  implement  any  solution  to  cover defective  LXs  (which  are  normally  protected  by  means  of  a technical  system),  then  drivers  will  be  required  to  comply with  instructions  received  from  other  sources
ETCS (2) cab signalling system — Parameter without explanation in the document
ETF — European Training Foundation
ETH — Estimated Time of Handover of a train from one IM to another.
ETH — The Estimated time of Handover (of a train from one infrastructure manager to another)
ETI — Estimated Time of Interchange of wagons from one RU to another.
ETI — The Estimated time of Interchange (of the train from one railway undertaking to another)
ETP — Estimated Time of Pick-Up (at arrival intermodal terminal)
ETS — European Telecommunications Standard
ETSI — European Telecommunications Standards Institute
EU — European Union
EU — European Union in tables or graphs to denote a group of Member States use the form: EU-9, EU-12, EU-15, etc. (but avoid this form in running text)
eu-LISA — European Union Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice
EU-OSHA — European Agency for Safety and Health at Work
EUA — European unit of account (replaced on 9 April 1979 by the ecu, which was in turn replaced by the euro on 1 January 1999)
EUAA — European Union Agency for Asylum (formerly the European Asylum Support Office – EASO)
EUAR / ERA — European Railway Agency (scheme owner)
EUDG — Expert Users and Development Group of the inland-tdg risk management framework, as described in the section 6 of the framework guide.
EUG — ERTMS Users Group
EUI — European University Institute
EUIPO — European Union Intellectual Property Office (replaced OHIM)
EUISS — European Union Institute for Security Studies
EUMC — European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia
EUR — Euro (see also Section 7.3.1)
EUR-Lex — Website providing access to EU law
Euratom — European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC)
Eureka — European Research Coordination Agency
EURES — European employment services
EUROBALISE — Balise compliant with the ERTMS/ETCS specification.
Eurocontrol — European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation
Eurofound — European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions
Eurolib — European library project
EUROLOOP — Loop compliant with the ERTMS/ETCS specification.
Euronet-DIANE — Direct information access network for Europe
European ATM Master Plan — The plan endorsed by Council Decision 2009/320/EC (41), and as subsequently amended.
European Capacity Management Tool (ECMT) — Further objectives of the Agency shall be to follow the development of national railway rules in order to support the performance of national authorities acting in the fields of railway safety and interoperability and to promote the optimisation of procedures.
European Co-operation for accreditation (EA) — The European association of national accreditation bodies recognised against the European Regulation 765/2008. All Member states of the European Union are members of EA. ( www.european-accreditation.org )
European Co-operation for accreditation (EA) — The European association of national accreditation bodies recognised against the Regulation (EC) 765/2008. All Member states of the European Union are members of EA. ( www.european-accreditation.org )
European Committee for Standardisation / European Committee for Electro-technical Standardisation (CEN/CENELEC) — Organisations responsible for defining technical standards for the European Single Market in all areas of economic activity.
European Coordinator — The Coordinator referred to in Article 52 of Regulation (EU) 2024/1679.
European Court of Justice (ECJ) — The highest court in the European Union in matters of European Union law. As a part of the Court of Justice of the European Union, it is tasked with interpreting EU law and ensuring its equal application across all EU Member States.
European Development Fund  (EDF) — The main instrument for EU aid for development cooperation in the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries and the overseas countries and territories (OCTs). It is governed by its own Financial Regulation and managed outside the General Budget. It is funded from direct contributions from EU countries at negotiated rates that differ from those for the General Budget
European Economic Interest Grouping (EEIG) — Where provided for by Directive (EU) 2016/797 and Directive (EU) 2016/798, the Agency shall perform the role of Union authority responsible for issuing authorisations for the placing on the market of railway vehicles and vehicle types and for issuing single safety certificates for railway undertakings.
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) — an initiative to help overcome the current investment gap in the European Union, jointly launched by the European Investment Bank Group and the European Commission. It aims to mobilise private investment in strategically important projects for the EU.
European Identification Number — The number for which the structure is ruled by Appendix 2 of COMMISSION DECISION 2007/756/EC of 9 November 2007 adopting a common specification of the national vehicle register provided for under Articles 14(4) and (5) of Directives 96/48/EC and 2001/16/EC (including COMMISSION IMPLEMENTING DECISION (EU) 2018/1614 of 25 October 2018 laying down specifications for the vehicle registers referred to in Article 47 of Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council and amending and repealing Commission Decision 2007/756/EC)
European instruction — An harmonised operational instruction giving a similar content to train drivers across the European Union in order for them to answer in a similar manner to similar situation.
European Maritime Single Window environment or EMSWe — ‘European Maritime Single Window environment’, as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) 2019/1239 of the European Parliament and of the Council (32).
European office — An administrative structure set up by the Commission, or by the Commission with one or more other Union institutions, to perform specific cross-cutting tasks.
European Rail Research Advisory Council (ERRAC) — Body that coordinates rail research at the European level.
European Rail Traffic Management System — Signalling and operation management system encompassing ETCS for the Control Command, ATO for the Automatic Train Operation and FRMCS and/or GSM-R for voice and data communication. FRMCS and/or GSM-R are/is used as radio bearer for ETCS and ATO.
European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) — A project aimed at replacing the different national rail control-command and signalling systems in Europe with a single system.
European rail traffic management system (ERTMS) — The European rail traffic management system, abbreviated as ERTMS, is a project which will serve to make rail transport safer and more competitive, through increased interoperability, reducing running costs and improving the system's efficiency.
European Rail Traffic Management System or ERTMS — As defined in point 2.2 of Annex I to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1695 (34), and in the context of implementation deadlines it refers to the Class A train protection system and any Class A radio system, referred to in that Regulation.
European Railway Agency — The Agency established pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 881/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 establishing a European Railway Agency
European Railway Traffic Management System (ERTMS) — ERTMS - The European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) is a single European signalling and speed control system that ensures interoperability of the national railway systems, reducing the purchasing and maintenance costs of the signalling systems as well as increasing the speed of trains, the capacity of infrastructure and the level of safety in rail transport. ERTMS comprises of the European Train Control System (ETCS), i.e. a cab-signalling system that incorporates automatic train protection, the Global System for Mobile communications for Railways (GSM-R) and operating rules.Technical specifications for ETCS and GSM-R are published in the Control Command and Signalling (CCS) Technical Specification for Interoperability (TSI).
European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles (ERATV) — Register of types of vehicles authorised by the Member States for placing in service. It contains the technical characteristics of vehicles’ types as defined in the relevant TSIs, the manufacturer’s name, dates, references and Member States granting authorisations, restrictions and withdrawals (Article 48 of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
European Register of Authorised Types of Vehicles (ERATV) — Register  of  types  of  vehicles  authorised  by  the  Member  States  for  placing  in service. It contains the technical characteristics of vehicles’ types as defined in the  relevant  TSIs,  the  manufacturer’s  name,  dates,  references  and  Member States   granting   authorisations,   restrictions   and   withdrawals   (Article   48   of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
European specification — A specification which falls into one of the following categories: -   a common technical specification as defined in Annex VIII of Directive 2014/25/EU, -   a European technical approval as referred to in Article 60 of Directive 2014/25/EU, or -   a European standard as defined in point (b) of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
European Standard — A standard adopted by a European standardisation organisation.
European standardisation deliverable — Any other technical specification than a European standard, adopted by a European standardisation organisation for repeated or continuous application and with which compliance is not compulsory
European standardisation organisation — An organisation listed in Annex I.
European Traffic Management Network (ETMN) — ETMN is a major project that combines data from all involved stakeholders, providing an approved guideline on TCCs cooperation involving RFCs - RUs- Timetable / Capacity allocation entities.
European Train Control System — The Control Command part of ERTMS.
European Train Control System (ETCS) level — ETCS application level related to the track side equipment.
European Union Agency for Railways (ERA) — An agency of the European Commission responsible for promoting interoperability in the European railway system.
European Union Agency for Railways (ERA) — The objective of the Agency shall be to contribute to the further development and effective functioning of a single European railway area without frontiers, by guaranteeing a high level of railway safety and interoperability, while improving the competitive position of the railway sector. In particular, the Agency shall contribute, on technical matters, to the implementation of Union legislation by developing a common approach to safety on the Union rail system and by enhancing the level of interoperability on the Union rail system.
European Union Agency for Railways (EUAR) — The European Agency providing the EU Member States and the Commission with technical assistance in the fields of railway safety and interoperability. EUAR is established and ruled by the Regulation (EU) 2016/796 of the European parliament and of the council of 11 May 2016 on the European Union Agency for Railways and repealing regulation (EC) No 881/2004.
Europe’s Rail Project — A project of the Europe’s Rail Joint Undertaking established by Council Regulation (EU) 2021/2085 (40), or its predecessor Shift2Rail Joint Undertaking.
Europol — European Union Agency for Law Enforcement Cooperation
EURORADIO — The functions required, including the message protocols, to provide an acceptably safe communications channel between ERTMS/ETCS trackside and ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment over an open radio network
EUROSIG — European Special Interest Group
EUROSTAT — The Statistical office of the European Union
Eurostat — The Statistical office of the European Union
Eurydice — information network on education in Europe (http://www.eurydice.org/)
EUSA — European School of Administration
EUSC — (See Satcen)
EV — Expected value
Evacuation — Evacuation of a train is when all passengers are instructed to leave the train and go on to the infrastructure under the supervision of on-board staff. On-board staff having agreed with the signaller or other responsible infrastructure manager staff, that it is safe to do so.
Evacuation and rescue point — An evacuation and rescue point is a defined location, inside or outside the tunnel, where fire fighting equipment can be used by the emergency response services and where passengers and staff can evacuate from a train.
Evaluations — Tools to provide a reliable and objective assessment of how efficient and effective interventions financed from or guaranteed by the EU budget have been or are expected to be (in the case of ex ante evaluation). Commission services assess to what extent they have reached their policy objectives, and how they could improve their performance in the future.
EVC — European Vital computer
EVC — European Vital Computer
EVCA — European Venture Capital Association
Event tree — In Bow-tie Terminology: Right part of the bow-tie, identifying the possible consequences of the critical event.
EVIC — European Visual Inspection Catalogue
EVN — European vehicle number
EVN — European vehicle Number
EVR — European Vehicle Register, as referred to in Article 47 of Directive (EU) 2016/797
EWOS — European workshop for open systems
EWT — European Wheelset traceability catalogue
Ex-ante conditionalities — Requirements to be fulfilled by the Member States in order to receive funding. They can be thematic (linked to specific investment or Union priorities) or general (not linked to specific  investment or Union priorities). The failure to fulfil ex-ante conditionalities shall constitute grounds for suspending interim payments by the Commission to the priorities of the programme  concerned that are affected.
Examination — A process to check a train driver’s or candidate train driver’s competence in accordance with Directive 2007/59/EC by one or more means such as written, oral and practical.
Examination centre — An entity established to provide examinations for train drivers in accordance with Article 25 of Directive 2007/59/EC.
Examiner — A person having relevant skills and competence, recognised to conduct and score examinations for the purposes of Directive 2007/59/EC.
Exceptional transport — A vehicle and/or the load carried which because of construction/design, dimensions or weight does not meet the parameters of the route and requires special authority for the movement and may require special conditions over part or its entire journey.
Exclusive right — A right entitling a public service operator to operate certain public passenger transport services on a particular route or network or in a particular area, to the exclusion of any other such operator.
Exclusive use — For the carriage of radioactive material, means the sole use, by a single consignor, of a wagon or of a large container, in respect of which all initial, intermediate and final loading, shipment and unloading are carried out in accordance with the directions of the consignor or consignee, where so required by RID.
Executive Board (ExB, EB, ExBo) — Representative of the authorities of the Member States concerned. The Executive Board defines the stragety an the objective of the corridor.
Exhaust gas emissions — Exhaust gas emissions to the external environment (see also parameter 8.6 - Diesel and other thermal traction system requirements).
Existence and TSI compliance of limits in harmonics in the traction current of vehicles — Indication whether rules exist and are compliant with the TSI.
Existence and TSI compliance of rules for magnetic fields emitted by a vehicle — Indication whether rules exist and are compliant with the TSI.
Existence of ballast — Specifies whether track construction is with sleepers embedded in ballast or not.
Existence of electric shore supply — Indication whether exists an installation of electric shore supply (fixed  installation for servicing trains).
Existence of emergency plan — Indication whether emergency plan exists.
Existence of evacuation and rescue points — Indication  of  existence  of  evacuation  and  rescue  points
Existence of external cleaning facilities — Indication whether exists an installation of external cleaning facility (fixed installation for servicing trains) as defined in TSI INF
Existence of GSM-R roaming to public networks — Existence  of  roaming  to  a  public  network In  case  of  Y,  provide  the  name  of  the  public  network  under parameter  1.1.1.3.3.7:
Existence of level crossings — Indication whether level crossings (including pedestrian track crossing) exist on the section of line.
Existence of operating restrictions or conditions — Indication  whether  restrictions  or  conditions  due  to  partial compliance  with  the  TSI  CCS  exist
Existence of platform assistance for starting train — Indication of existence of equipment or staff supporting the train crew in starting the train.
Existence of refuelling — Indication whether exists an installation of refuelling  (fixed installation for servicing trains) as defined in TSI INF
Existence of rules and restrictions of a strictly local nature — Existence of rules and restrictions of a strictly local nature
Existence of sand restocking — Indication whether an installation of sand restocking exists (fixed installation for servicing trains).
Existence of severe climatic conditions — Climatic conditions on the line are severe according to European standard.
Existence of switch over between different protection, control and warning systems while running — Indication whether a switch over between different systems whilst running exist
Existence of switch over between different radio systems — Indication whether a switch over between different radio systems and no communication system whilst running exist
Existence of toilet discharge — Indication whether exists an installation of toilet discharge (fixed installation for servicing trains) as defined in TSI INF
Existence of trackside hot axle box detector (HABD) — Existence of trackside HABD
Existence of train detection system fully compliant with the TSI — Indication if there is any train detection system  installed  and  fully compliant  with the TSI CCS.
Existence of walkways — Indication  of  existence  of  walkways
Existence of water restocking — Indication whether exists an installation of water restocking (fixed installation for servicing trains) as defined in TSI INF
Existence value — Economic value which people attribute to something purely for its existence (no consumption is foreseen); can only be estimated via the contingent valuation method.
Existing rail system — Infrastructure composed of lines and fixed installations of the existing, rail network as well as the vehicles of all categories and origin travelling on that infrastructure (Article 2(16) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Existing rail system — The infrastructure composed of lines and fixed installations of  the existing rail network  as well as the vehicles of all categories and origins travelling on that infrastructure.
Existing rail system — Infrastructure  composed  of  lines  and  fixed  installations  of  the  existing,  rail network as well as the vehicles of all categories  and origin travelling on that infrastructure (Article 2(16) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Existing rail system — Infrastructure  composed  of  lines  and  fixed  installations  of  the  existing,  rail network  as  well  as  the  vehicles  of  all  categories  and  origin  travelling  on  that infrastructure (Article 2(16) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Exit signal — A main signal that is intended for trains leaving a station.
Expectation window — The interval between the outer limits to accept a balise group.
Expected lines — Lines which either are planned in future or under construction but not yet completely in service. Expected line can also be an existing line which shall be part of the RFC in the future
Expected value — (General math formulation) The sum (integral) of a cumulative distribution function of the random variable over a given probability space.a cumulative distribution function of the random variable over a given probability space. Under this framework we apply the finite formulation for assessing the expected value of the severity of a finite number of DG scenarios (samples) having a given cumulative frequency (F) for a given severity (S) over the frequency domain. The curves composed by [F; S] couples over the considered samples is called the F/S curve. It is also known as F/N curve when applied to the estimation of expected human fatalities.
Expenditure allocated — EU expenditure that it is possible to allocate to individual Member States. Non-allocated expenditure concerns notably expenditure paid to beneficiaries in third countries. Allocation of expenditure by country is necessary in order to calculate budgetary balances
Explosion — This critical event is only associated with solid substances classified as explosives. It corresponds to a change of physical state of the substance (LPI) by action of a energy/heat source or by action of a chemical source (incompatible reagent). This change of state implies combustion of a solid with overpressure generation (or an explosion) due to a violent and spontaneous reaction. In case of a substance stored in a closed vessel, an explosion (or an explosive decomposition of solid) is considered as an internal cause of overpressure leading to a loss of containment (for example, catastrophic rupture or breach on the shell).
Exposed surface — That surface of the specimen subjected to the heating conditions of the test
Exposure — Process in which vulnerabilities are exposed to hazardous areas of a given intensity.
Extensive damage — Damage that can be immediately assessed by the investigating body to cost at least EUR 2 million in total.
Extensive damage — Damage that can immediately be assessed by the investigating body to cost at least 1.8 million SDR in total.
Extensive disruptions to traffic — That train services on a main railway line are suspended for six hours or more.
Extensive disruptions to traffic — Extensive disruption to traffic occurs when train services on at least one main railway line are suspended for more than six hours.
Extent of operation — The extent characterised by the number of passengers and/or volume of goods and the estimated size of a railway undertaking in terms of number of employees working in the railway sector (i.e., as a micro, small, medium-sized or large enterprise).
Extent of operation — In relation to railway operations carried out by railway undertakings, the extent characterised by the number of passengers and/or volume of goods and the estimated size of a railway undertaking in terms of number of employees working in the railway sector (i.e., as a micro, small, medium-sized or large enterprise) (Directive (EU) 2016/798). In relation to railway operations carried out by infrastructure managers, the extent characterised by the length of railway track and the estimated size of the infrastructure manager in terms of number of employees working in the railway sector (Regulation (EU) 2018/762).
Exterior doors — Includes requirements for door locking systems, steps and gaps for vehicle access for exterior passenger doors.
External emissions — Parameter without explanation in the document
External lights — Parameter without explanation in the document
External steps and handrails for shunting staff — Parameter without explanation in the document
External warning, signalling, marking functions and software integrity requirements — Parameter without explanation in the document
Externality (external cost) — Economic cost not normally taken into account in markets or in decisions by market players.
Externally illuminated safety sign — Safety sign that is illuminated, when required, by an external source.
Extinction coefficient — Natural logarithm of the ratio of incident light intensity to transmitted light intensity, per unit light path length.
Extra-EU and Intra-EU — It refers to transactions with all countries outside of the EU: the rest of the world except for the European Union (EU) Member States. The term is used in the context of external trade, balance of payments, foreign direct investment, migration, transport, tourism and similar statistical areas where goods, capital or people moving in and out of the EU are being measured and where the EU as a whole is considered in relationship to the rest of the world. Extra-EU transactions of the EU as a whole are the sum of the extra-EU transactions of the EU Member States. Intra-EU, on the other hand, refers to all transactions occurring within the EU. The term can have a different coverage, depending on the perspective taken: the EU as a whole, a Member State, a region or a city, a port or an airport,etc The exports of a particular Member State, for instance, can be split into two parts, on the one hand to the countries outside the EU, the rest of the world, 'extra-EU', and on the other to the other Member States, 'intra-EU'. Departures from an airport can be 'extra-EU' or 'intra-EU', in the latter case they also include domestic flights, within the Member State. To complicate matters, the EU has not always had the same composition, due to consecutive enlargements. For this reason, both terms are sometimes further qualified as 'extra-EU-15', 'intra-EU-25' etc.; 'extra-EU-15', for instance, refers to the rest of the world apart from the 15 Member States that in the past made up EU-15.
Extra-large tank-container — A tank container with a capacity of more than 40 000 litres
F — Frequency
F/N — Frequency / Number of fatalities
F0 — Frequency of a DG event
F1 — Frequency of a transport event
FA — ATO Failure
Facilities on-board for staff — Parameter without explanation in the document
Factor of distancec Z — Relationship between the height (h) of a sign and the observation distance (l), used to determine observation distances of signs z = l/h
FADN — Farm accountancy data network
FAI — First article inspection
Fail-Safe — A design philosophy which results in any expected failure maintaining or placing the equipment in a safe state.
Failure — In the context of the parameter 4.2.1.2. Availability/Reliability, the termination of the ability of an item to perform a required function with the required performance and ‘failure mode’ means the effect by which the failure is observed.
Failure — Effect of an error on the intended service.
Failure mode — In the context of the parameter 4.2.1.2. The effect by which the failure is observed.
Failure reporting analysis and corrective action system (FRACAS) — Closed loop process used to improve dependability of current and future designs by feedback of testing, modification and use experience.
FAO — Food and Agriculture Organization (UN)
Fare — A charge to be paid for transportation or service
Fare — A charge to be paid for transportation or service (from the TAP glossary)
Fare and freight transport revenue — The total fees collected from the provision of rail transportation services during the reporting period; it excludes other income such as revenue from catering, station services and on-board services.
Fatalities and weighted serious injuries (FWSIs) — A measurement of the consequences of significant accidents combining fatalities and serious injuries, where 1 serious injury is considered statistically equivalent to 0,1 fatalities.
Fault — An abnormal condition that could lead to an error in a system. A fault can be random or systematic. (4)
Fault detection time — Time span that begins at the instant when a fault occurs and ends when the existence of the fault is detected.
Fault negation time — Time span that begins when the existence of a fault is detected and ends when a safe state is enforced.
Fault tree — In Bow-tie Terminology: Left part of the bow-tie, identifying the possible causes of the critical event.
FB — Nominal brake application force per wheel
Fb — Instantaneous application force per wheel
FB1 — Total friction element application force per wheel for braked mass m1
FB2 — Total friction element application force per wheel for braked mass m2
FBR — Fast breeder reactor
Feeder / Outflow path — Any path/path section prior to reaching an operation point on an RFC (feeder path) or any path/path section after leaving the RFC at an operation point (outflow path). The feeder and/or outflow path may also cross a border section which is not a part of a defined RFC.
Feeder service — Short sea shipping service which connects at least two ports in order for the freight (generally containers) to be consolidated or redistributed to or from a deep-sea service in one of these ports. By extension, this concept may be used for inland transport services.
Feeder services — A short-sea network between ports with the objective of consolidating or redistributing freight to or from a deep sea service in one of these ports, the so-called hub port. A short-sea network between ports with the objective of consolidating or redistributing freight to or from a deep sea service in one of these ports, the so-called hub port.
FEOGA — FR equivalent of EAGGF
Ferry transport — Requirements concerning the use of ferries by the vehicle, including running gear and vehicle gauge constraints, requirements for securing and fixing.
FFFIS — Form-Fit Functional Interface Specification
FFFIS — Form Fit Functional Interface Specification
FFFS — Form-Fit Functional Specification
FFFS — Form Fit Functional Specification
FI — Finland
fi — Finnish
Fibre-reinforced plastics — Material consisting of fobrousand/or particulate reinforcement contained within a thermoset or thermoplastic polymer (matrix).
Fibreboard IBC — A fibreboard body with or without separate top and bottom caps, if necessary an inner liner (but no inner packagings), and appropriate service and structural equipment.
FIDE — International Federation for European Law
FIFG — Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance
File — An aggregation of records organised in line with the Commission’s activities, for reasons of proof, justification or information and to guarantee efficiency in the work; the group of records making up the file is organised in such a way as to form a coherent and relevant unit in terms of the activities conducted by the Commission or its departments.
Filing plan — An instrument with a hierarchical and logical structure, in the form of a tree structure with a number of interlinked headings, which enables files (or other aggregations of records) to be intellectually organised and linked to the context in which they were drawn up, on the basis of the functions, activities and working processes.
Filing system — Any structured set of personal data which are accessible according to specific criteria, whether centralised, decentralised or dispersed on a functional or geographical basis.
Filler — Any enterprise which fills dangerous goods into a tank (tank-wagon, wagon with demountable tank, portable tank or tank-container) and/or into a wagon, large container or small container for carriage in bulk, or into a battery-wagon or MEGC.
Filler — An  enterprise that  loads goods  into a tank (including a tank-wagon, wagon with demountable tank, portable tank or tank-container), into a wagon, large container or small container for carriage in bulk, or into a battery-wagon or multiple-element gas container.
Filling pressure — The maximum pressure actually built up in the tank when it is being filled under pressure (see also "Calculation pressure", "Discharge pressure", "Maximum working pressure (gauge pressure)" and "Test pressure").
Filling ratio — The ratio of the mass of gas to the mass of water at 15 °C that would fill completely the means of containment fitted ready for use.
Final administrative decision — A decision of an administrative authority having final and binding effect in accordance with the applicable law.
Final offer/TimeTable (FTT) — Capacity offered  by IMs/C-OSS  to applicants for allocation, with the possibility to refuse or accept. The immediate allocation follows the acceptance, no further adjustments or consultation follow.
Final place of safety — The final place of safety is the place where passengers and staff will no longer be impacted by the effects of the initial incident (e.g. smoke opacity and toxicity, temperature). It is the termination point of the evacuation.
Financial asset — Any asset in the form of cash, an equity instrument of a publicly or privately held entity or a contractual right to receive cash or another financial asset from such entity.
Financial instrument — A Union measure of financial support provided from the budget to address one or more specific policy objectives of the Union which may take the form of equity or quasi-equity investments, loans or guarantees, or other risk-sharing instruments, and which may, where appropriate, be combined with other forms of financial support or with funds under shared management or funds of the European Development Fund (EDF).
Financial instruments — Measures of financial support provided from the budget in order to address one or more specific policy objectives of the Union through a risk-sharing mechanism. Such instruments may take the form of equity or quasi-equity investments, loans or guarantees, or other risk-sharing instruments, and may, \where appropriate, be combined with other forms of financial support or with funds under shared management or from the European Development Fund
Financial liability — A contractual obligation to deliver cash or another financial asset to another entity.
Financial Regulation — The regulation laying down the rules for the establishment and implementation of the general budget of the European Union. It is adopted through the ordinary legislative procedure after consulting the European Court of Auditors.
Fire — The fire is a process of combustion characterized by heat or smoke or flame or any combination of these three.
Fire category of rolling stock required — Passenger train fire category in accordance with point 4.1.4 of TSI  LOC&PAS
Fire category of rolling stock required — Categorisation how a passenger train with a fire on board will continue  to  operate  for  a  defined  time  period
Fire equipment sign — Safety sign that indicates the location or identification of fire equipment.
Fire in rolling stock — A fire or explosion that occurs in a railway vehicle (including its load) when it is running between the departure station and the destination, including when stopped at the departure station, the destination or intermediate stops, as well as during re-marshalling operations.
Fire protection concept and protection measures — E.g. fire category, classification, protection measures for vehicles and parts of the vehicle (e.g. driver's cab), material properties, fire barriers, fire detectors (including ionisation detectors) and fire extinguishing equipment.
Fire safety and evacuation — Parameter without explanation in the document
Fireball — A fire which burns so rapidly that the burning mass can rise like a cloud or ball into the air.
Fires in rolling stock — Fires and explosions that occur in railway vehicles (including their load) when they are running between the departure station and the destination, including when stopped at the departure station, the destination station or intermediate stops, as well as during re-marshalling operations.
First article inspection (FAI) — Set of inspection and verification (3.1.3.12) activities in order to validate a production (3.1.2.16) process.
First come, first served principle — A principle based on the rule that the applicant requesting a particular product at a certain point in time receives the product earlier or is given preference over an applicant who requested that product later.
First Railway Package — A package of European measures designed to stimulate the European railway sector by encouraging competition and separating infrastructure management from operations.
FIS — Functional Interface Specification
Fix PaP — PaP-Sections with fixed times, Data cannot be modified in the path request by an applicant
Fixed block — A block in which the extremities of the block sections are at fixed locations. The signalling allows a train to move from one block to the next, normally only when the block ahead is clear.
Fixed formation — Train formation that can only be reconfigured within a workshop environment.
Fixed formation — Railway vehicles or units intended to be coupled/uncoupled or assembled/disassembled only in a workshop environment.
Fixed nose protection — Dimension between the crossing nose and check rail (see dimension No 2 on Figure 14)
Fixed parameter — In the harmonised risk estimation model this term is used to characterise a parameter whose value cannot be changed by the user.
Fixed Rake of Coaches — Formation of several coaches ‘semi-permanently’ coupled together, or which can be reconfigured only when it is out of service.
Fixed tank — A tank having a capacity of more than 1 000 litres which is permanently attached to a wagon (which then becomes a tank-wagon) or is an integral part of the frame of such wagon.
Fixing of devices to car body structure — E.g. for weld-on parts, also for fixed devices inside the passenger areas.
FJ — Fiji
FK — Falkland Islands (the) [Malvinas]
Flame front — Furthest extent of travel of a sustained flame centrally along the length of the test specimen
Flammable component — Ffor aerosols, flammable liquids, flammable solids or flammable gases and gas mixtures as defined in Notes 1 to 3 of sub-section 31.1.3 of Part III of the Manual of Tests and Criteria. This designation does not cover pyrophoric, self-heating or water-reactive substances. The chemical heat of combustion shall be determined by one of the following methods ASTM D 240, ISO/FDIS 13943: 1999 (E/F) 86.1 to 86.3 or NFPA 30B.
Flangeway depth — Dimension between the running surface and the bottom of flangeway (see dimension No 6 on Figure 14).
Flangeway width — Dimension between a running rail and an adjacent check or wing rail (see dimension No 5 on Figure 14).
Flash fire — Fast combustion of a flammable gas cloud after delayed ignition, without pressure build-up.Flash fire is the commonly used term in English for gas cloud fire.
Flash point — The lowest temperature of a liquid at which its vapours form a flammable mixture with air.
Flashing — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of less than 1 s
Flashing — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of less than 1 s
Flat — A loadable platform having no superstructure whatsoever but having the same length and width as the base of a container and equipped with top and bottom corner fittings. This is an alternative term used for certain types of specific purpose containers – namely platform containers and platform-based containers with incomplete structures.
Flat wagon — Wagon without roof or sides, or wagon without roof but with sides not higher than 60 cm, or swing-bolster wagon, of ordinary or special type. Sometimes also referred to as flat car.
Flex PaP — PaP-Sections with flexible times, data may be modified in the path request by an applicant according to individual needs, but without exceeding the given range of standard running times, stopping times and train parameters. Where applicable, the maximum number of stops and total stopping time per section has to be respected.
Flexibility instrument — Instrument allowing the financing for a given financial year of clearly identified expenditure which could not be financed within the limits of the MFF ceilings available for one or more headings.  Established in the interinstitutional agreement of 17 May 2006, the flexibility instrument permits the budgetisation of EUR 600 million per year (2011 prices). The portion of this amount that was not used during a year may be used in the following three years
Flexible approach — When an applicant requests adjustments to a pre-arranged path, e.g. a different station for the change of driver or shunting that is not provided for in the path publication. Also if the applicant requests feeder and/or outflow paths connected to the pre-arranged path and/or a connecting path between different Rail Freight Corridors, these requests will be handled under a flexible approach.
Flexible bulk container — A flexible container with a capacity not exceeding 15 m3 and includes liners and attached handling devices and service equipment.
Flexible bulk container — See "Bulk container
Flexible IBC — A body constituted of film, woven fabric or any other flexible material or combinations thereof, and if necessary, an inner coating or liner, together with any appropriate service equipment and handling devices.
Floor height changes — Requirements concerning floor height changes inside passenger vehicles. Excluded: step height and gap for vehicle access for exterior doors (see 5.1.1 - Exterior doors).
FLU — Filling /Unfilling (emptying)
FM — Micronesia (Federated States of)
FMEA — Failure Mode and Effects Analysis
FMEA — Failure mode and effects analysis
FMECA — Failure Mode, Effect and Criticality Analysis
FMECA — Failure mode, effects and criticality analysis
FO — Faroe Islands (the)
FOB — Free on board (Incoterms 2010)
FOP — Fundamental Operational Principle
Forecast — The best estimate of an event (e.g. arrival, departure or passing time of a train)
Forecast point — A target point for which the forecast is generated. It may relate to arrival, departure, passage or handover
Forecast Time — Best estimate of arrival, departure or passing time of a train.
Foreign rail passenger service — A rail passenger service which was purchased by the passenger in a country, but is performed in a country different from the country of purchase
Foreign sale — The sale of a train ticket by an issuer which is not (one of) the carrier(s) operating the train where the ticket will be used. The issuer is located in a country different from the country of the carrier(s)
Foreign sales — The sale of a train ticket by an issuer which is not (one of) the carrier(s) operating the train where the ticket will be used. The issuer is located in a country different from the country of the carrier(s) (from the TAP glossary)
Foreign sales — The sale of a train ticket by an issuer which is not (one of) the carrier(s) operating the train where the ticket will be used. The issuer is located in a country different from the country of the carrier(s)
Fork lift truck — Vehicle equipped with power-driven horizontal forks, which allow it to lift, move or stack pallets, containers or swap bodies. The latter two are usually empty.
Fork lift truck — Vehicle equipped with power-driven horizontal forks, which allow it to lift, move or stack pallets, containers or swap bodies. The latter two are usually empty. These operations can only be performed on the front row of stack.
Formal recognition of learning outcomes — The process of granting official status by a competent authority to acquired learning outcomes for purposes of further studies or employment, through (i) the award of qualifications (certificates, diploma or titles); (ii) the validation of non-formal and informal learning; (iii) the grant of equivalence, credit or waivers
Forum Train Europe (FTE) — It is the European platform for Railway Undertakings for Capacity Management and Timetabling. Freight RUs and Passenger RUs, irrespectively where they are considered as incumbent or new entrants are joining the same tables to tackle the key capacity challenges and improve the competitiveness of carriage by rail. Although being competitors, FTE members share the problems on the same infrastructure, they share the wish to have transparent and standardised processes, and they would like to have a market-orientated and efficient service from IMs.
Forward movement — A train movement in which the driver is situated in the leading engine and the train is moved in the direction of the train orientation.
Forwarding agent/freight forwarder — Intermediary who arranges for the carriage of goods and/or associated services on behalf of a shipper.
Fouling point — The place where a vehicle standing on a converging line would come into contact with a vehicle on the other line.
Fourth Railway Package — The Fourth Railway Package is a set of proposals put forward by the Commission in 2013 with the aim of improving rail transport in Europe. It encompasses measures aimed at liberalising the European domestic passenger market, strengthening the functions and independence of the rail infrastructure manager in Europe, reinforcing the role of the European Union Agency for Railways and streamlining the certification and authorisation procedures.
FPB — Parking brake application force
FR — France
fr — French
FRA — European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
FRACAS — Failure reporting analysis and corrective action system
Framework agreement — A legally binding general agreement under public or private law, setting out the rights and obligations of an applicant and the infrastructure manager in relation to the infrastructure capacity to be allocated and the charges to be levied over a period longer than one working timetable period.
Framework agreement — A legally binding general agreement under public or private law, setting out the rights and obligations of an applicant and the infrastructure manager in relation to the infrastructure capacity to be allocated and the charges to be levied over a period longer than one working timetable.
Framework capacity — Infrastructure capacity allocated under a framework agreement.
Framework capacity statement — An overview of both the framework capacity allocated on the lines of a given network and an indication of the volume and nature of the available capacity on such lines, and may include a graphical view, with the purpose of informing potential applicants for framework agreements.
Framework contract — A public contract concluded between one or more economic operators and one or more contracting authorities, the purpose of which is to establish the terms governing specific contracts under it to be awarded during a given period, in particular with regard to price and, where appropriate, the quantity envisaged.
Framework for Capacity Allocation (FCA) — The executive board shall define the framework for the allocation of the infrastructure capacity on the freight corridor.' The framework specifies procedures, time limits, priority rules and any information needed to apply for and use a PaP or RC on a Rail Freight Corridor.
Free wheel passage at check rail/wing rail entry — Dimension between the working face of the crossing check rail or wing rail and the gauge face of the running rail opposite across the gauge measured at entry to check rail or wing rail respectively. (see dimensions No 4 on Figure 14). The entry to the check rail or wing rail is the point at which the wheel is allowed to contact the check rail or wing rail.
Free wheel passage at crossing nose — Dimension between the working face of the crossing wing rail and check rail opposite across the gauge (see dimension No 3 on Figure 14).
Free wheel passage in switches — Dimension from the gauge face of one switch rail to the back edge of the opposite switch rail (see dimension No 1 on Figure 14).
Freeport — Zone where goods can be manufactured and/or stored without payment of their relevant duties and taxes.
Freight container — It is a transport equipment: - of a permanent nature and accordingly strong enough to be suitable for repeated use; - specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transport, without intermediate reloading; - fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another; - so designed as to be easy to fill and empty; - having a length of 20 feet or more.
Freight corridor — The freight railway lines of the European Transport Corridor as specified in Article 11(1) of Regulation (EU) 2024/1679 of the European Parliament and the Council of 13 July 2024 on Union guidelines for the development of the trans-European transport network ( 2 ) and in Annex III to that Regulation, including the railway infrastructure and its equipment and relevant rail services in accordance with Directive 2012/34/EU.
Freight forwarders — Companies/persons responsible for dispatching freight traffic to its destination.
Freight terminal — Station where handling of goods takes place (goods are loaded on, or unloaded from, transport vehicles). May also include shunting of rail vehicles (wagons) between trains, without any (un)loading. May include open access and privately-owned industrial tracks, tracks of warehouses, loading places, Ro-La loading places, container loading places, loading areas and trans-shipment sidings.
Freight train — A freight train is a train composed of one or more locomotive(s) and one or more wagon(s). A freight train including at least one wagon carrying dangerous goods is a dangerous goods train.
Freight wagon or wagon — Railway vehicle normally intended for the transport of goods. Sometimes also referred to as freight car.
Freight-related items — Freight-specific requirements.
Frequency — Number of pre-defined occurrences divided by a given normaliser. Within this framework the following typical normalisers are considered: per year, per volume of transport (number of tons, number of tons/km) or per number of predefined operations.
Frequency bands for detection — Bands  of  the  frequency  management  of  the  train  detection systems    as    defined    in    the    specification    referenced    in Appendix   A-1,   index   [D],   and   in   the   specific   cases   or technical  documents  referred  to  in  Article  13  of  TSI  CCS when  they  are  available
Friction brake components — Parameter without explanation in the document
Friction element — Stator part of a tread brake adapted to generate a friction force when engaged with a wheel tread.
Friction element back plate — Element onto which the friction element is fixed, acting as the interface between  the friction element and friction element holder.
Friction element back plate — Element onto which the friction element is fixed, acting as the interface between the friction element and friction element holder.
Friction element force — Force with which the friction element is made to come into contact with the wheel tread.
Friction material — Consumable portion of the friction element that acts on the wheel tread in order to provide the specified brake performance.
Friction material — Consumable portion of the friction element that acts on the wheel tread in order to provide the specified brake performance
FRMCS — Future Railway Mobile Communication System
FRMCS — Future Railway Mobile Comunication System
Front visibility/visibility field — Definition of visibility field for the driver to the line in front of him in relation to the driver's positions. Including wiper cleaning field.
Frontex — European Border and Coast Guard Agency (until 5.10.2016: ‘European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union’)
Frontloading — Incurring or paying off expenditure (for example) early on in a given period; focusing efforts,  costs or expenditure at the beginning of a project.
FRS — Functional Requirement Specification
FRS — Functional Requirements Specification
FRT — Normal (non-DG) Freight Transport
FS — Full Supervision mode
FS — Ferrovie Dello Stato – Italian State Railways
FS — Flight stage
FS — Full supervision (ERTMS mode)
FS — Full Supervision
fsignal — Frequency of excitation tone
FTE (Forum Train Europe) — A series of meetings (normally two per year) where the European RUs and IMs plan the International trains for the following year
FTP — The File Transfer Protocol A protocol to transfer files between computer systems in the TCP/IP network
FTP — File Transfer Protocol
FUA — Functional Urban Area
Fuel cell — An electrochemical device that converts the chemical energy of a fuel to electrical energy, heat and reaction products.
Fuel cell engine — A device used to power equipment and which consists of a fuel cell and its fuel supply, whether integrated with or separate from the fuel cell, and includes all appurtenances necessary to fulfil its function.
Fulfilment — The process which delivers the Product to the customer after its purchase.
Full fuel cycle — Complete fuel cycle; the discovery, depletion (mining), processing, transport and use of an energy resource.
Full load — Any load originating from one consignor for which the use of a wagon or large container is exclusively reserved and all operations for the loading and unloading of which are carried out in conformity with the instructions of the consignor or of the consignee. NOTE 1: The corresponding term for radioactive material is "exclusive use". NOTE 2: This definition covers the term "wagon load" used in the other Appendices to COTIF and in other railway regulations.
Full supervision mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode giving full protection against overspeed and overrun.
Full train load — Any consignment comprising one or more wagonloads transported at the same time by the same sender at the same station and forwarded with no change in train composition to the address of the same consignee at the same destination station.
Full wagon load — Any consignment of goods for which the exclusive use of a wagon is required, whether or not the total loading capacity is utilised.
Function — Written description of the purpose of the information to be conveyed by a graphical symbol.
Functional and technical specification related to the electric power supply — Parameter without explanation in the document
Functional and technical specification related to the interface between the vehicle and the energy subsystem — Parameter without explanation in the document
Functional identifier — It is part of the system identifier and means a figure or a number of figures defined by the individual configuration management, which represents a reference of the functionality for CCS implemented in a CCS subsystem or Interoperability constituent.
Functional number (GSM-R) — Full number used within the functional addressing scheme to identify an end user or a system by function or role rather than by a specific item of radio equipment or user subscription. The functional number can be divided into two parts: -     functional  addressing  (process  of  addressing  a  call  using  a specific   number,   representing   the   function   a   user    is performing, rather than a number identifying the GSM-R on- board), -      location   dependent   addressing   (process   of   addressing   a particular  function   –  typically  a  signaller  –  based  on  the current location of the user – typically a train).
Functional number (GSMR) — Full number used within the functional addressing scheme to identify an end user or a system by function or role rather than by a specific item of radio equipment or user subscription. The functional number can be divided into two parts: - functional addressing (process of addressing a call using a specific number, representing the function a user is performing, rather than a number identifying the GSM-R on-board), - location dependent addressing (process of addressing a particular function – typically a signaller – based on the current location of the user – typically a train).
Functional requirement — Requirement that specifies a function that a product or a service performs EXAMPLE:Railway loading gauge, possibility to add a car in a metro vehicle. Note 1 to entry: See Annex B.
Functional requirements for braking at train level — Refers to the availability of basic brake functionalities (usually service braking, emergency braking, a parking brake function) and characteristics of the main brake system (usually automaticity, continuity, inexhaustibility).
Further supply facilities — Requirements for any other supplies, e.g. external power supply for vehicles for stabling of trains.
Future Railway Mobile Communication System (FRMCS) — Future Railway Mobile Communication System (FRMCS) is the future worldwide telecommunication system designed by UIC, in close cooperation with the different stakeholders from the rail sector, as the successor of GSM-R but also as a key enabler for rail transport digitalisation
F_DGSC — Frequency of damage by the considered Dangerous Goods Scenario
F_Release — Frequency of DG release
G — Goods train braking mode
G24 — Intergovernmental Group of Twenty-four on International Monetary Affairs
G7 — Group of Seven (leading industrialised nations: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK, USA)
G77 — Group of 77
GA — Gabon
ga — Irish
Galileo — The Galileo programme is Europe's initiative for a global satellite navigation system, providing an accurate, guaranteed global positioning service under civilian control.
Gangways — Requirements concerning gangways which allow people (staff or passenger) to interchange between coupled vehicles.
Gantry crane — An overhead crane comprising a horizontal gantry mounted on legs, which are either fixed, run in  fixed tracks or on rubber tyres with relatively limited manoeuvrability. The load can be moved horizontally, vertically and sideways. Such cranes normally straddle a road/rail and/or ship/shore interchange.
Gantry crane — An overhead crane comprising a horizontal gantry mounted on legs which are either fixed, run in fixed tracks or on rubber tyres with relatively limited manoeuvre. The load can be moved horizontally, vertically and sideways. Such cranes normally straddle a road/rail and/or ship/shore interchange.
Gas — A substance which: (a) at 50 °C has a vapour pressure greater than 300 kPa (3 bar); or (b) is completely gaseous at 20 °C under standard pressure of 101.3 kPa.
Gas cartridge — See "Small receptacle containing gas".
Gas cloud fire — See “Flash fire”.
Gate criteria — Acceptance criteria for deliverables (3.1.4.3) at gates in order to support the decisions to be taken, e.g. accepted, conditionally accepted or rejected.
Gate methodology — Project management practice to evaluate, at the end of each significant phase, the maturity of deliverables (3.1.4.3) for moving to the next phase, with the proper risk assessment and mitigation plan. Note 1 to entry: The transition between two phases is formalized by control milestones.
Gateway — Station within the journey of a train with Intermodal units, where the load changes the wagons.
GATS — General agreement on Trade in Services
GATT — General agreement on Tariffs and Trade
Gauge — Set of rules including a reference contour and its associated calculation rules allowing definition of the outer dimensions of the vehicle and the space to be cleared by the infrastructure.
Gauge — Set of rules including a reference contour and its associated calculation rules allowing defining the outer dimensions of the vehicle and the space to be cleared by the infrastructure. NOTE: According to the calculation method implemented, the gauge will be a static, kinematic or dynamic
Gauging — Gauges  as  defined  in  European  standard or  other  local  gauges,  including  lower  or upper part.
Gauging — Gauges as defined in European standard or other local gauges, including  lower  or  upper  part. In  accordance  with  point  7.3.2.2  of  TSI  LOC&PAS,  sections of lines of the United Kingdom of Great Britain network may not  have  gauge  reference profile.
GB — United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the)
GCC — Gulf Cooperation Council
GCU — General Contract of Use (http://www.gcubureau.org)
GCU — General Contract of Use
GCV — Gross calorific value
GD — Grenada
GDP — Gross domestic product
GDPR — Regulation (EU) 2016/679
GE — Georgia
General Conditions of Carriage — The conditions of the carrier in the form of general conditions or tariffs legally in force in each Member State and which have become, through the conclusion of the contract of carriage, an integral part of it.
General Conditions of Carriage — The conditions of the carrier in the form of general conditions or tariffs legally in force in each Member State and which have become, by the conclusion of the contract of carriage, an integral part of it.
General documentation — General documentation, technical description of the vehicle, its design and intended use for the kind of traffic (long-distance train, suburban vehicles, commuter services, etc.) inclusive of intended and max design speed, including general plans, diagrams and necessary data for registers, e.g. length of vehicle, axle arrangement, axle spacing, mass per unit, etc.
General operation — A unit is designed for general operation when the unit is intended to be coupled with other unit(s) in a train formation which is not defined at design stage.
General rule — A measure which applies without discrimination to all public passenger transport services of the same type in a given geographical area for which a competent authority is responsible.
General Terms and Conditions (GTC) — Stipulations of a document common to all the users/partners. General Terms and Conditions of the RNE standard contract of use: the provisions that set out – for each IM – the technical, financial and administrative rules for the use of infrastructure and train operations. Such provisions may be contained – in some cases – in the Network Statement.
Generation of trackside HABD — Specific  for  the  French  Italian  and  Swedish networks. Generation  of  trackside hot axle box detector.
Genetic data — Personal data relating to the inherited or acquired genetic characteristics of a natural person which give unique information about the physiology or the health of that natural person and which result, in particular, from an analysis of a biological sample from the natural person in question.
Geographical  location  of  signal — Geographical  coordinates  in  decimal degrees  normally  given for  the  position  of  the  signal
Geographical Area — Geographical area covering a number of stations in a given region to which an empty wagon must be returned if no other instruction is received from the keeper.
Geographical location of operational point — Geographical coordinates in decimal degrees normally given for the centre of the OP.
Geotechnical structures — A structure that includes ground or structural member that relies on the ground resistance. Note: Earthworks is a subset for geotechnical structure
GF — French Guiana
GFCM — General Fisheries Commission for the Mediterranean
GG — Guernsey
GH — Ghana
GHG — Greenhouse gas
GHGs — Transport greenhouse gases
GHS — The eighth revised edition of the Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals, published by the United Nations as document ST/SG/AC.10/30/Rev.8.
GI — Gibraltar
GISCO — Geographic information system for the Commission (Eurostat)
GL — Greenland
Global fare — See IRT
Global fare (global price) — See IRT
Global price — A modality of establishing the price of a rail ticket where it includes in a single undifferentiated amount the contract of carriage, the reservation and any possible supplement. It is the kind of pricing used for IRTs. (synonym : Market price)
Global price train — A train that a passenger can board only having purchased a global price ticket
Global provisioning — The total amount of resources deemed necessary over the entire lifetime of a budgetary guarantee as a result of applying the provisioning rate referred to in Article 211(1) to the amount of the budgetary guarantee authorised by the basic act referred to in point (b) of Article 210(1).
Global System for Mobile Communications for railway (GSM-R) — Railway (GSM-R) is a radio communication system offering a wide range of voice and data services needed for daily operation of railways. GSM-R provides telephony, SMS and data services, as do public GSM networks.GSM-R facilitates the communication between train driver and traffic control centres, by providing specific features such as group communication, location dependent addressing, priority levels, railway emergency calls, shunting communication. GSM-R is fully defined in ETSI standards.
Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals — means the tenth revised edition of the United Nations publication bearing this title (ST/SG/AC.10/30/Rev.10)
GM — Gambia (the)
GmbH — DE: Gesellschaft mit beschränkter Haftung
GN — Guinea
GNP — Gross national product
GoA — Grade of Automation
Good practice — Process or method that has been shown to work well, succeeds in achieving its objective(s), is acknowledged and therefore can be recommended as an approach.
Goods carried by rail — Any goods moved by rail vehicles. This includes all packaging and equipment, such as intermodal transport units (ITU) and pallets as well as road goods vehicles carried by rail. Sometimes also referred to as rail freight
Goods in transit by rail throughout — Goods carried by rail through the reporting country between two places (place of loading/unloading) outside the declaring country. Wagons entering and/or leaving the reporting network by ferry are included.
Goods loaded — It refers to goods placed on a means of transport and dispatched. According to the mode of transport, the definition can be specified: Rail Goods placed on a railway vehicle and dispatched by rail. Unlike in road and inland waterway transport, transshipments from one railway vehicle directly to another and change of tractive vehicle are not regarded as unloading/loading. However, if the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle, loaded on another mode of transport and, again loaded on another railway vehicle, this is considered as unloading from the first railway vehicle followed by loading on the second railway vehicle. Road Goods placed on a road vehicle and dispatched by road. Transshipment from one goods road vehicle to another or change of the road tractor are regarded as loading after unloading. Inland waterways Goods placed on an inland waterways transport vessel and dispatched by inland waterways. Transshipment from one inland waterways transport vessel to another is regarded as loading after unloading. The same applies to changes of pusher tugs or tugs. Maritime transport Goods placed on a merchant ship for transport by sea. Transshipment from one merchant ship to another is regarded as loading after unloading. Goods loaded include national goods, transshipment goods (national or foreign goods arriving in port by sea) and land transit goods (foreign goods arriving in port by road, rail, air or inland waterway).
Goods loaded — Goods placed on a railway vehicle and dispatched by rail. Unlike in road and inland waterway transport, transhipments from one railway vehicle directly to another and change of tractive vehicle are not regarded as unloading/loading. However, if the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle, loaded on another mode of transport and, again loaded on another railway vehicle, this is considered as unloading from the first railway vehicle followed by loading on the second railway vehicle.
Goods rail transport link — The combination of the place of loading and the place of unloading of the goods transported by rail whichever itinerary is followed. Places are defined by using international classification systems such as NUTS (Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics – Eurostat).
Goods road motor vehicle — It is a road motor vehicle designed to carry goods (e.g. a lorry), or any coupled combination of road vehicles designed to carry goods, (i.e. lorry with trailer(s), or road tractor with semi-trailer and with or without trailer). Lorry is a rigid road motor vehicle designed, exclusively or primarily, to carry goods. Road tractor is designed, exclusively or primarily, to haul other road vehicles which are not power-driven (mainly semi-trailers). Agricultural tractors are excluded. Trailer is designed to be hauled by a road motor vehicle. This category excludes agricultural trailers and caravans. Semi-trailer is goods road vehicle with no front axle designed in such way that part of the vehicle and a substantial part of its loaded weight rests on a road tractor.
Goods unloaded — Goods taken off a railway vehicle after transport by rail. Unlike in road and inland waterway transport, transhipments from one railway vehicle directly to another and change of tractive vehicle are not regarded as unloading/loading. However, if the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle, loaded on another mode of transport and, again loaded on another railway vehicle, this is considered as unloading from the first railway vehicle followed by loading on the second railway vehicle.
Governance Entity — A regulatory entity for the governance of the telematics TSIs (TAP TSI and TAF TSI) This entity will address both RU/IM and passenger retail business. It will procure and provide the services needed by TAP TSI and TAF TSI stakeholders without which RUs and IMs cannot meet their regulatory obligations. The entity will facilitate the work needed in common amongst RUs and IMs.
Governing the particular subject concerned — Applying to the specific case which is governed by a provision of the Convention, including its appendices, and is not governed by European Union legislation.
GovTech — Technology-based cooperation between public and private sector actors supporting public sector digital transformation.
GP — Guadeloupe
GPRS — General Packet Radio Service
GPRS for ETCS — Indication if GPRS can be used for  ETCS
GQ — Equatorial Guinea
GR — Greece
Grade of Automation — Automation level of train operation, in which a train can be operated, resulting from sharing responsibility for given basic functions of train operation between operations staff and system. [RD5] Note: Modified to fit mainline (removed Urban Guided Transport).
Gradient for stabling tracks — Maximum value of the gradient expressed in millimetres per metre.
Gradient profile — Sequence of gradient values and locations of change in gradient
Grant — A financial contribution by way of donation. Where such a contribution is provided under direct management, it shall be governed by Title VIII.
Grants — Direct financial contributions, by way of donation, from the budget in order to finance either an action intended to help achieve an objective part of an EU policy or the functioning of a body which pursues an aim of general European interest or has an objective forming part of an EU policy.
Graphical symbol — Visually perceptible figure with a particular meaning used to transmit information independently of language.
GRIPS — General relation-based information processing system
Gross domestic product (GDP) at market prices — Final result of the production activity of resident producer units. It corresponds to the economy’s total output of goods and services, less intermediate consumption, plus taxes less subsidies on products.
Gross national income (GNI) — Gross domestic product (GDP) minus primary income payable by resident units to non-resident units plus primary income receivable by resident units from the rest of the world. GNI has widely replaced gross national product (GNP) as an indicator of income. In the area of the EU budget this change took effect as from the year 2002.
Gross tonne-kilometre hauled — Unit of measurement representing the movement over a distance of one kilometre of one tonne of hauled vehicles (and railcars) and contents. The weight of railcars is included, whereas the weight of locomotives is excluded. Passengers and their luggage are excluded. Shunting and other similar movements are excluded.
Gross vehicle weight — It is total of the weight of the vehicle (or combination of vehicles) including its load when stationary and ready for the road declared permissible by the competent authority of the country of registration. This includes the weight of the driver and the maximum number of persons permitted to be carried.
Gross weight — It is the total weight of the goods carried, including all packaging but excluding the tare weight of the transport unit.
Gross weight of goods — The total weight of goods carried, including packaging but excluding the tare weight of the transport unit (e.g. containers, swap bodies and pallets for containing goods as well as road goods vehicles carrying goods).
Gross weight of load — Booked/actual total weight (mass) of goods, including packing but excluding the carrier’s equipment.
Gross-gross tonne-kilometre hauled — Unit of measurement representing the movement over a distance of one kilometre of one tonne of railway vehicle where the weight of tractive vehicle is included. Included are the weights of: tractive unit, hauled railway vehicle and its load. Passengers and their luggage are excluded. Shunting and other similar movements are excluded.
Gross-gross weight — It includes: - the total weight of the goods; - all packaging: - the tare-weight of the transport unit (for example containers, swap bodies and pallets for containing goods as well as road goods vehicles carrying goods and transported by rail).
Gross-gross weight of goods — The total weight of the goods carried, all packaging and the tare weight of the transport unit (e.g. containers, swap bodies and pallets for containing goods as well as road goods vehicles carrying goods and transported by rail). This is the weight to be used in the compilation of rail transport statistics.
Group of Representative Bodies (GRB) — Body with several other railway association supporting the rail sector’s input to the Agency work programme and its effect on safety and interoperability.
Group of undertakings — A controlling undertaking and its controlled undertakings.
Group ticket — Group-coupon which on its own or together with other group-coupons acts as a ticket for a group
Grouped fatality risk — A measure of the risk posed by the occurrence of specific hazardous scenarios resulting in grouped fatalities. Within the present framework this risk is represented by the F/N curve. Outcome of hazardous events in which human vulnerabilities are exposed to hazards (see exposure).
Grouped OD — A group of routes linking an Origin and a Destination for which an IRT ticket can be established at the same price. The use of Grouped OD allows to reduce the amount of data to be delivered in B.2 format
GS — South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
GSA — General Sales Agent; an organization which is authorized by a carrier to issue its tickets, and which in turn delegates this faculty to various single agents working for the GSA
GSA — European GNSS Agency (same abbreviation in all languages)
GSM — Global System for Mobile Communications
GSM — Global system for mobile communications
GSM-R — Global System for Mobile communication – Railway
GSM-R — Global System for Mobile Communications - Rail
GSM-R — Global System for Mobile Communications – Railways
GSM-R — Global System for Mobile communications - Railway
GSM-R — Global System for Mobile communication - Railway
GSM-R  use  of  group  555 — Indication  if  group  555  is  used
GSM-R compliant radio system — Parameter without explanation in the document
GSM-R mode — Status of the GSM-R on-board which provides functions for: - train movement, - or movement of a shunting composition.
GSM-R mode — Status of the GSM-R on-board which provides functions for:       train movement,       or shunting movement.
GSM-R network — Radio network which provides GSM-R functions.
GSM-R network is configured to allow forced de-registration of a functional number by another driver — This feature will condition the applicable operational rules for drivers and signallers when dealing with cab radios registered under  wrong  numbers
GSM-R network marker — Harmonised trackside GSM-R signal defined in EN 16494/2015 to indicate the network to be selected.
GSM-R network marker — Harmonised trackside GSM-R signal defined in [2] to indicate the network to be selected.
GSM-R networks covered a roaming agreement — List  of  GSM-R  networks  which  are  covered by a roaming agreement
GSM-R on-board — The part of GSM-R installed on a railway vehicle.
GSM-R version — GSM-R  functional  requirements  specifica tion (FRS) and system requirements speci fication   (SRS)   version  number   installed lineside.
GSP — Generalised system of preferences
GT — Gross tonnage
GT — Guatemala
GTT-CIV — CIV Ticket Manual [Guide titres de transport]
GU — Guam
Guarantee — A written commitment to assume responsibility for all or part of a third party’s debt or obligation or for the successful performance by that third party of its obligations if an event occurs which triggers such guarantee, such as a loan default.
Guarantee on demand — A guarantee that must be honoured by the guarantor upon the counterpart’s demand, notwithstanding any deficiencies in the enforceability of the underlying obligation.
GUI — Guidance curve
GW — Guinea-Bissau
GWh — Gigawatt-hour
GY — Guyana
Halt — Stop-off point generally open to passenger traffic only and not usually staffed. Sometimes also referred to as a flag stop.
Handling device — (For flexible IBCs) means any sling, loop, eye or frame attached to the body of the IBC or formed from the continuation of the IBC body material.
Handling point — Station where the RU may change the train composition, but where it remains responsible for the wagons, no change of responsibility.
Handover — Passing control authority of the subject item from one organization to another, including transfer of responsibilities to the receiving organization.
Handover point — Location of train’s journey or between two paths where the responsibility for planning and/or allocation and/or operation changes from one IM to another. The involved IM assumes the role Planning IM.
Handover point — The point where the responsibility changes from one infrastructure manager to another.
Handrails — Requirements concerning handrails for passenger use inside/outside of the vehicle (design specifications, where to use).
Harmful effects — Negative effects on human health.
Harmful interference — Harmful interference as defined in point (r) of Article 2 of Directive 2002/21/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ).
Harmonic characteristics and related overvoltages on the overhead contact line — Vehicle requirements related to the maximum harmonics and the related overvoltages on the overhead contact line.
Harmonised risk estimation model — The harmonised risk estimation model is the risk estimation model described in the Guide for risk estimation.The harmonised risk estimation model was established during the development of the Inland TDG risk management framework on the basis of existing practices.
Harmonised standard — Any European standard adopted by one of the European standardisation bodies listed in Annex I to Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services (13) in connection with a mandate by the Commission drawn up in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 6(3) of that Directive, which, by itself or together with other standards, provides a solution as regards compliance with a legal provision.
Harmonised standard — European standard adopted on the basis of a request made by the Commission for the application of Union harmonising legislation (Article 2(1)(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012)
Harmonised standard — A standard adopted by one of the European standardisation bodies listed in Annex I to Directive 98/34/EC on the basis of a request made by the Commission in accordance with Article 6 of that Directive.
Harmonised standard — A European standard as defined  in point (c) of Article 2(1) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
Harmonised standard — Harmonised standard as defined in point (c) of point 1 of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
Harmonised standard — A standard adopted by one of the European standardisation bodies listed in Annex I to Directive 98/34/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down a procedure for the provision of information in the field of technical standards and regulations and of rules on Information Society services ( 1 ) on the basis of a request made by the Commission in accordance with Article 6 of that Directive.
Harmonised standard — A European standard adopted on the basis of a request made by the Commission for the application of Union harmonisation legislation.
Haulage — Transport by road
Hauled vehicle-kilometre — Unit of measurement representing any movement of a hauled vehicle over one kilometre. Railcars movements are included. Shunting movements are excluded.
Hazard — A condition that could lead to an accident.
Hazard — A condition that could lead to an accident (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Hazard — Source of potential damage/harm. Remark: with this definition “a condition” that could lead to an accident is also considered as being “a source of potential damage/harm”.
Hazard classification — The classification of hazards for chemicals is defined in the ‘Globally Harmonised System of Labelling and Classification of Chemicals’ (GHS). This classification is notably used to derive the classification of Dangerous Goods for their transport, as reported in chapter 2 of RID/ADR/ADN.
Hazard identification — The process of finding, listing and characterising hazards.
Hazard record — The document in which identified hazards, their related measures, their origin and the reference to the organisation which has to manage them are recorded and referenced.
Hazardous area — Multi-dimensional space within which one or more hazards are present during a certain period of time.
Hazardous scenario — Assumed sequence of events triggered by a dangerous goods event leading to pre-defined types of hazard and damage/harm.
HBW — The non SI unit for steel hardness defined in the specification referenced in Appendix T, Index [16].
HCFCs — Hydrochlorofluorocarbons
HD — Harmonisation Document
HDTV — High-definition television
Head pressure pulses — Effect of pressure pulses caused by the head of the train at the track side.
Header — A group of data transmitted at the beginning of a message, to provide technical information about the following application data (sent by whom to whom, consisting of which components, etc.)
Headings — In the Multiannual Financial Framework, the groups of EU activities in broad categories of expenditure. The Multiannual Financial Framework for the period 2014-2020 is composed of six broad expenditure categories, or headings.
Headlights — It refers to the functionality to provide sufficient visibility for the driver in front of the train. This may be ensured by using of the same physical devices as for marker lights or additional devices.
Health and safety — Parameter without explanation in the document
Health and Safety Conditions — In the context of this Regulation, this refers only to the medical and psychological qualifications required to operate the relevant elements of the subsystem.
Heat for sustained burning — Product of the time from the start of exposure of a specimen to the arrival of the flame front at a specified position and the incident radiant heat flux corresponding to that position measured on a non-combustible calibration board. Note 1 to entry: The heat for sustained burning is expressed in megajoules per square metre (MJ/m2). Note 2 to entry: The positions are specified in Table 1.
Heated wagon — Insulated wagon fitted with a heater. •	Class A. Heated equipment for use when the mean outside temperature is–10°C •	Class B. Heated equipment for use when the mean outside temperature is–20°C
Heating cable interference current — Interference current due to the heating in Diesel traction.
Heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems — E.g. internal air quality, requirement in case of fire (switch off).
Heating, ventilation and air-conditioning systems in driver's cab — E.g. allowed CO2 concentration in the cab, air flows caused by the ventilation system having an air velocity exceeding the limit value recognised to ensure a proper working environment, temperature ranges, temperatures which have to be reached under certain environmental circumstances.
Heavy maintenance — Work that is not carried out routinely as part of day-to-day operations and requires the vehicle to be removed from service.
Hedonic pricing — Valuation technique which infers a value for environmental quality from rent or property price differentials.
Height of check rail — Height of the check rail above the running surface
Height of platform — Distance  between  the  upper  surface  of platform   and   running   surface   of   the neighbouring track. It is the nominal value expressed in millimetres.
Hermes — The name of the European rail VPN provided by the company HIT Rail, used among others for the exchange of reservation requests and replies
Hermes community — The group of RUs using the Hermes network for exchange of reservation messages
Hermetically closed tank — A tank that: – is not equipped with safety valves, bursting discs, other similar safety devices or vacuum valves or selfoperating ventilation valves; or – is equipped with safety valves preceded by a bursting disc according to 6.8.2.2.10, but is not equipped with vacuum valves or self-operating ventilation valves. A tank intended for the carriage of liquid substances with a calculation pressure of at least 4 bar or intended for the carriage of solid substances (powdery or granular) regardless of its calculation pressure is also considered hermetically closed if it: – is equipped with safety valves preceded by a bursting disc according to 6.8.2.2.10 and vacuum valves or self-operating ventilation valves, in accordance with the requirements of 6.8.2.2.3; or, – is not equipped with safety valves, bursting discs or other similar safety devices, but is equipped with vacuum valves or self-operating ventilation valves, in accordance with the requirements of 6.8.2.2.3.
HFC — Hydrofluorocarbon
High sided wagon — Wagon with no roof and with rigid sides higher than 60 cm. Sometimes also referred to as high-sided gondola car.
High speed passenger services — Passenger rail services operated without intermediate stops between two places separated at least by a distance of more than 200 km on specially-built high-speed lines equipped for speeds generally equal or greater than 250 km/h and running on average at those speeds.
High voltage components — Parameter without explanation in the document
High-cube container — Container of standard ISO length and width but with a height of 9’6" (2.9 m). These high containers have now been included in a revised ISO standard.
High-power recharging — A recharging point with a power output of more than 22 kW for the transfer of electricity to an electric vehicle.
High-speed rail — It is a rail passenger service running at much higher speeds than normal passenger trains. The network of the trans-European high-speed rail system includes: - specially built high-speed lines equipped for speeds generally equal to or greater than 250 km/h; - specially upgraded high-speed lines equipped for speeds of the order of 200 km/h; - specially upgraded high-speed lines which have special features as a result of topographical, relief or town-planning constraints, on which the speed must be adapted to each case.
High-speed rail network (HSR) — A network of railway lines where trains regularly operate at or above 250 km/h (155 mph).
High-speed railway line — A principal railway line allowing traffic at speeds on the main segments equal to or greater than 200 km/h on upgraded lines and 250 km/h on especially built lines.
High-speed railway vehicle — A railway vehicle designed to operate at a speed of at least 250 km/h on dedicated high-speed lines.
High-speed train (HST) — Train designated to operate: -either at speeds of at least 250 km/h (155 mph) on new track, i.e. lines specially built for high speed, while enabling operation at speeds exceeding 300 km/h in appropriate circumstances, -or at speeds of the order of 200 km/h (124 mph) on upgraded rail lines, where compatible with the performance levels of these lines.
Highest level of management — A manager, management or coordination and oversight body at the most senior administrative level, taking account of the high-level governance arrangements in each Union entity.
Highly improbable — An occurrence of failure at a frequency less than or equal to 10– 9 per operating hour.
Hirer — Any individual or other legal entity designated as such by the keeper/owner of a wagon.
HIV — Human immunodeficiency virus
HK — Hong Kong
HLT — Handling / Loading / Transboarding
HM — Heard Island and McDonald Islands
HMI — Human Machine Interface Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
HN — Honduras
Holder of the vehicle type authorisation — The natural or legal person that has applied for and received the vehicle type authorisation, or its legal successor.
Holding time — The time that will elapse from the establishment of the initial filling condition until the pressure has risen due to heat influx to the lowest set pressure of the pressure limiting device(s) of tanks intended for the carriage of refrigerated liquefied gases. NOTE: For portable tanks, see 6.7.4.1.
HOME KMC — The KMC in a KM domain to which trackside and on-board entities belonging to that domain refer for key management.
Home printing — A type of indirect fulfilment where the customer buys a rail ticket in remote (on the web, at the telephone, …) and receives by e-mail or by download a printable file that will be accepted on board as valid ticket
Home Station — Designated station marked on the wagon and to which an empty wagon must be sent if no other instruction is received from the keeper.
Hosting provider — A company managing a hosting system
Hosting system — An IT system where one or more attributing systems are hosted
Hot axle box — An axle box and bearing that has exceeded its maximum designed operating temperature.
Hot BLEVE — BLEVE resulting from the overheating of a tank shell by thermal radiation or direct exposure to a fire, causing the rupture of the shell.
HR — Croatia
hr — Croatian
HRB — Harbour waters area (Inland waterways)
HS — Handshake
HS — Harmonised System
HS code — 6-digit Code list for products used by customers, identically to the first 6 digits of the CN Code.
HS RST TSI — High speed Rolling Stock TSI
HSAck — Handshake Acknowledgement
HSC — High Speed Craft code, International Maritime Organization
HSLM — High Speed Load Model
HSRej — Handshake Rejected
HSReq — Handshake Request
HT — Haiti
HTTP — The Hypertext Transfer Protocol The client/server protocol used to connect to servers on the Web
HU — Hungary
hu — Hungarian
HUB — Central point for the collection, sorting, transshipment and distribution of goods for a particular area. This concept comes from a term used in air transport for passengers as well as freight. It describes collection and distribution through a single point (“Hub and Spoke” concept).
Hub port — It is a port served by deep sea scheduled shipping and by scheduled short sea shipping.
Human and organisational factors — All human performance characteristics and organisational aspects that must be considered to ensure the lifelong safety and effectiveness of a system or organisation.
Human cost — Value attributed to human life in excess of the average economic output produced by an individual.
Human-centered approach — An approach considering the needs, capabilities and behaviours of people first and then designing to accommodate those needs, capabilities and behaviours.
Humidity — Parameter without explanation in the document
HVAC system — Equipment installation of heating, ventilation and air conditioning for rolling stock.
Hydraulic/pneumatic supply and control systems — Functional and technical specifications, e.g. compressed air power supply, capacity, type, temperature range, air dryers (towers), dew point indicators, insulation, air intake characteristics, fault indicators, etc.
Hz — Hertz
I — Indication supervision limit
I&A — Identification and Authentication
IAEA — The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) (IAEA, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna); "IAEA Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material" means one of the editions of those Regulations, as follows: (a) For the 1985 and 1985 (as amended 1990) editions: IAEA Safety Series No. 6; (b) For the 1996 edition: IAEA Safety Series No. ST-1; (c) For the 1996 (revised) edition: IAEA Safety Series No. TS-R-1 (ST-1, Revised); (d) For the 1996 (as amended 2003), 2005 and 2009 editions: IAEA Safety Standards Series No. TS-R-1; (e) For the 2012 edition: IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-6; (f) For the 2018 edition: IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR–6 (Rev.1).
IAEA — International Atomic Energy Agency (UN)
IAF — International Accreditation Forum
IAF — International Accreditation Forum (http://www.iaf.nu/)
IAF — International Accreditation Forum
IAF MD — Mandatory document of IAF
IAL — Immediate Action Limits
IATA — International Air Transport Association
IBC — See "Intermediate bulk container"
IBC — Integrated broadband communications
IBC — Intermediate Bulk Container.
IBRD — International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank) (UN)
IBSFC — International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission
IC — Interoperability Constituent
IC — Interoperability Constituents
ICAO — The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO, 999 University Street, Montreal, Quebec H3C 5H7, Canada).
ICAO — International Civil Air Organization
ICAO — International Civil Aviation Organization
ICAO Technical Instructions — The Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of Dangerous Goods by Air, which complement Annex 18 to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago 1944), published by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) in Montreal.
ICCAT — International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
ICJ — International Court of Justice
ICM line section — ICM (International Contingency Management) line section is a section of RFC (Rail Freight Corridor) lines, where re-routing is not possible without the international coordination with neighbouring IMs.
ICPs — Interuniversity cooperation programmes
ICRC — International Committee of the Red Cross
ICST-COM — International Classification of Ships by Type, European Commission
ICT — Information and communication technologies
ICT process — An ICT process as defined in Article 2, point (14), of Regulation (EU) 2019/881.
ICT product — An ICT product as defined in Article 2, point (12), of Regulation (EU) 2019/881.
ICT service — An ICT service as defined in Article 2, point (13), of Regulation (EU) 2019/881.
ICT systems for transport — Information and communications technology systems and applications using information, communication, navigation or positioning or localisation technologies, including space based technologies, which make it possible to process, store and exchange the data and information needed to manage infrastructure, mobility and traffic on the trans-European transport network effectively, to report relevant information to authorities and to provide services to citizens, shippers and operators that add value, including systems for resilient, safe, secure, environmentally sound and capacity-efficient use of the network; they include systems, technologies and services referred to in points (16) to (22) and may also include on-board devices with corresponding infrastructure or digital components.
ICT technical specification — A technical specification in the field of information and communication technologies.
ICT technical specification — ICT technical specification as defined in Article 2, point (5), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
ID — Identity
ID — Indonesia
ID and phone number of ERTMS/ETCS Radio Block Center — Unique  RBC  identification  (NID_C+NID_RBC)  and  calling number    (NID_RADIO)    as    defined    in    the    specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
IDA — Multiannual programme to support the implementation of trans-European networks for the interchange of data between administrations
IDCP — International Dolphin Conservation Programme
Identifiability — Property of a graphical symbol which enables its elements to be perceived as the objects or shapes depicted.
Identification of platform — Unique  platform  identification  or  unique platform number within OP
Identification of siding — Unique siding identification or unique siding number within OP
Identification of track — Unique track identification or unique track number within OP
Identification of track — Unique track identification or unique track number within section of line
Identification of trackside HABD — Specific  for  the French, Italian  and Swedish networks. Applicable  if  trackside  HABD  is  not  TSI compliant,  identification  of  trackside  hot axle box detector.
IDST — FR: information et documentation scientifiques et techniques
IE — Ireland
IEA — International Energy Agency
IEA — International Energy Agency (OECD)
IEC — International Electrotechnical Commission
IEC — International Electro-technical Commission
IEFR — International Emergency Food Reserve
IFC — International Finance Corporation (UN)
IFOPT — Identification of Fixed Objects in Public Transport.  IFOPT defines a model and identification principles for the main fixed objects related to public access to Public Transport (e.g. stop points, stop areas, stations, connection links, entrances, etc.)
IFRC — International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
IG — Implementation Guide
IGC — Intergovernmental Conference
Ignition — Onset of sustained flaming as defined in 3.10.
IIS — Infrastructure [Passenger] Information System
IL — Israel
ILO — International Labour Organization
ILU — Intermodal Loading Unit
IM — Infrastructure Manager
IM — Infrastructure Manager
IM — Infrastructure Manager means some body or firm responsible in particular for establishing, managing and maintaining railway infrastructure, including traffic management and control-command and signalling; the functions of the infrastructure manager on a network or part of a network may be allocated to different bodies or firms. Where the infrastructure manager, in its legal form, organisation or decision-making functions, is not independent of any railway undertaking, the functions referred to in Sections 2 and 3 of Chapter IV shall be performed respectively by a charging body and by an allocation body that are independent in their legal form, organisation and decision-making from any railway undertaking. (Directive 2012/34/EU). An IM can assume the roles Responsible IM and/or Planning IM.
IM — Any body or undertaking that is responsible in particular for establishing and maintaining railway infrastructure. This may also include the management of infrastructure control and safety systems. The functions of the infrastructure manager on a corridor or part of a corridor may be allocated to different bodies or undertakings
IM — Isle of Man
IM Entry Point — Section where the CT train leaves the intermodal terminal area and enters the first public IM network
IM Exit Point — Section where the CT train leaves the last public IM network and enters the arrival terminal
IM's code — Infrastructure  manager  means  any  body or  undertaking that is responsible in particular  for  establishing  and  maintaining railway infrastructure or a part thereof.
Image content — Written description of the elements of a graphical symbol or safety sign and their relative disposition
IMCO — Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organisation
IMDG — International Maritime Dangerous Goods code, International Maritime Organization
IMDG Code — The International Maritime Dangerous Goods Code, for the implementation of Chapter VII, Part A, of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 (SOLAS Convention), published by the International Maritime Organization (IMO), London.
IMF — International Monetary Fund (UN)
IMI — Innovative Medicines Initiative
Immediate Action Limit — The value which, if exceeded, requires taking measures to reduce the risk of derailment to an acceptable level.
Immediate level transition order — An Immediate Level Transition Order means both a level transition ordered “now” and a level transition ordered at null distance not in relation with in-fill.
IMO — The International Maritime Organization (IMO, 4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, United Kingdom).
IMO — International Maritime Organization
IMP — Integrated Mediterranean Programme
Impact — Measurement of the severity of pre-defined types of damage/harm.
Impact of the environment on the vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
Impact of the vehicle on the environment — Parameter without explanation in the document
Impartiality — Statistics must be developed, produced and disseminated in a neutral manner, and that all users must be given equal treatment.
Implementation plan — The document presenting the means, the strategy and the measures that the parties concerned intend to implement which are necessary and sufficient to organise and manage the freight corridor.
Implementing rules — Until 2018, the detailed rules for the implementation of the Financial Regulation. They were set out in a Commission Regulation adopted after consulting all institutions and could not alter the Financial Regulation upon which they depend. They no longer exist, as the new Financial Regulation contains all those rules.
Importer — Any natural or legal person established within the Community who places a product from a third country on the Community market.
Importer — Any natural or legal person established within the Union who places radio equipment from a third country on the Union market.
Improbable — An occurrence of failure at a frequency less than or equal to 10– 7 per operating hour.
Improvement target — For TDG, expressed as an expectation value of fatalities per year from all modes of TDG. This would be used to monitor performance and propose additional restrictions or safety measures.
Impulsive sound — Sound characterized by one or more brief bursts of sound pressure and that is such that the duration of a single impulsive noise is usually less than 1 s. EXAMPLE:Noise from blowoff valves, relay switches. Note 1 to entry: The quantification of impulsiveness is set out in Annex B.
Impulsive sound — Noise characterized by one or more brief bursts of sound pressure and is such that the duration of a single impulsive noise is usually less than 1 s. Note 1 to entry: Adapted from ISO 1996‑1:2003. Note 2 to entry: This definition does not apply to a whole pass-by event. Note 3 to entry: Examples of impulsive noise sources: Blowoff valves, relay switches.
IN — India
In advance of, In rear of — A term indicating a point beyond a specific location on the track, with respect to a given direction.  A term indicating a point on the approach to a specific location on the track, with respect to a given direction.  in rear of / in advance of Specific location
In service value — Value measured at any time after the infrastructure has been placed into service.
In-kind contribution — Non-financial resources made available free of charge by third parties to a beneficiary.
Incident — As defined in Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
Incident — Any occurrence, other than an accident or serious accident, affecting the safety of railway operations.
Incident — Any occurrence, other than an accident, highlighting a potential safety issues in railway operations. Sometimes also referred to as accident precursor, or near-miss.
Incident — Any occurrence, other than an accident or serious accident, affecting the safety of railway operations (Directive (EU) 2016/798). This includes near misses.
Incident — Any occurrence, other than accident or serious accident, associated with the operation of trains and affecting the safety of operation.
Incident — An event compromising the availability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of stored, transmitted or processed data or of the services offered by, or accessible via, network and information systems.
Incident — An event which has the potential to significantly disrupt, or that disrupts, the provision of an essential service, including when it affects the national systems that safeguard the rule of law.
Incident handling — Any actions and procedures aiming to prevent, detect, analyse, and contain or to respond to and recover from an incident.
Incident Management Tool (IMT) — Module in RNE TIS to inform about incidents, their impact on capacity, train movement and manage train runs. The tool supports procedures defined in the  International Contingency Management Handbook.
Incident manager — The incident manager is in charge of organising the return to safe operations after a disruption at the national infrastructure managers. This person must be fluent in English and reachable 24/7.
Independent body — An ‘independent body’ means in this context any assessment entity (body or person) which is competent according to national legislation (such as construction law or railway law) to perform an assessment of the protective provisions against electric shock. This independent body may be or not an organisation which is also acting as a notified body or designated body within the meaning of Interoperability Directive (EU) 2016/797
Indipendence, technical — Freedom from any mechanism which can affect the correct operation of more than one item.
Indirect fulfilment — The provision to a customer of a travel document printed on value paper in a moment successive to the purchase, or stored on a medium different from value paper.
Indirect identification — The identification of a statistical unit by any other means than by way of direct identification.
Indirect Management — One of the three forms of implementation of the EU budget, based on entrustment by the Commission of one or more third parties (e.g. third countries, international organisations, EIB Group) for various reasons (e.g. expertise of the third party, nurturing cooperation, enhancing cost-efficiency, etc.)
Individual risk — Likelihood per year that a person staying at one given place on or in the surrounding of the infrastructure under consideration is killed by the effects of a transport event, including DG scenarios.
Indivisible load — A load that cannot, for the purpose of carriage by road, be divided into two or more loads without undue expense or risk of damage and which owing to its dimensions or mass cannot be carried by a motor vehicle, trailer, road train or articulated vehicle complying with this Directive in all respects.
Induced interference current/voltage — Parameter without explanation in the document
Industrial risks - locations where it is dangerous for the driver to step out — Well  Known  Text  polygonal  shape
INEA — Innovation and Networks Executive Agency
INF — Infrastructure (TSI)
INF — Infrastructure
INF TSI — Infrastructure TSI
INFCE — international nuclear fuel cycle evaluation
INFILL information — Trackside data, referred to a main signal, which is transmitted at locations in rear of the main signal. Provides, for example, the ability to inform a train that the signal ahead has cleared.
INFILL loop — A loop which is installed at a place (e.g. in rear of a signal) to avoid unnecessary delay by transmitting in fill information advising the train at once when the signal ahead clears.
Information — A structured approach to ensure that important information is available to those making judgments and decisions at all levels of the organisation and to ensure the completeness and appropriateness of the information.
Information on system separation — Indication of required several information on system separation
Information point — Specific location on the track where information can be transmitted from ERTMS/ETCS trackside to ERTMS/ETCS on- board equipment (see also SPOT TRANSMISSION)
Information provider — The RU making available the timetable of a whole train
Information security — Preservation of confidentiality, integrity and availability of information Note 1 to entry: In addition, other properties, such as authenticity, accountability, non- repudiation, and reliability can also be involved. Note 2 to entry: Information security includes cybersecurity.
Information security policy — A set of information security objectives, which are or have to be established, implemented and checked. It comprises, but is not limited to, Decisions (EU, Euratom) 2015/444 and (EU, Euratom) 2015/443.
Information Security Steering Board (ISSB) — The governance body that supports the Corporate Management Board in its IT-security-related tasks.
Information society service — A service as defined in point (b) of Article 1(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 1 ).
Information society service — A service as defined in point (b) of Article 1(1) of Directive (EU) 2015/1535 of the European Parliament and of the Council (17).
Infrastructure — The track, points, level crossings, engineering structures (bridges, tunnels, etc.), rail-related elements of stations (including entrances, platforms, zones of access, service venues, toilets and information systems, as well as their accessibility features for persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility), safety and protective equipment.
Infrastructure capacity — The potential to schedule train paths requested for an element of infrastructure for a certain period.
Infrastructure gauge — Vertical and lateral limits relative to the centre line of a track that provide adequate clearance
Infrastructure inspection vehicles — Vehicles utilised to monitor the condition of the infrastructure. They are operated in the same way as freight or passenger trains, with no distinction between transport and working modes.
Infrastructure manager — Any public body or undertaking responsible in particular for establishing and maintaining railway infrastructure, as well as for operating the control and safety systems.
Infrastructure manager — Any body or firm responsible for the operation, maintenance and renewal of railway infrastructure on a network, as well as responsible for participating in its development as determined by the Member State within the framework of its general policy on development and financing of infrastructure. (Article 3(2) of Directive 2012/34/EU amended by Directive (EU) 2016/2370)
Infrastructure manager — Any body or firm responsible for the operation, maintenance and renewal of railway infrastructure on a network, as well as responsible for participating in its development as determined by the Member State within the framework of its general policy on development and financing of infrastructure.
Infrastructure manager — Anybody  or  firm  responsible  for  the  operation, maintenance  and  renewal  of railway infrastructure on a network, as well as responsible for participating in its development as determined by the Member State within the framework of its general policy on development and financing of infrastructure  (Article 3(2) of Directive 2012/34/EU)
Infrastructure manager — Any  body  or  firm  responsible  for  the  operation, maintenance  and  renewal  of railway infrastructure on a network, as well as responsible for participating in its development as determined by the Member State within the framework of its general  policy  on  development  and  financing of  infrastructure  (Article 3(2) of Directive 2012/34/EU amended by Directive (EU) 2016/2370)
Infrastructure manager — An infrastructure manager as defined in point (2) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU.
Infrastructure manager — Any body or firm responsible in particular for establishing, managing and maintaining railway infrastructure, including traffic management and control-command and signalling; the functions of the infrastructure manager on a network or part of a network may be allocated to different bodies or firms (Directive 2012/34/EU).
Infrastructure manager — An undertaking or an authority which manages railway infrastructure.
Infrastructure manager — Any entity or undertaking responsible in particular for the establishment and maintenance of railway infrastructure. This may also include the management of infrastructure control and safety systems. The functions of infrastructure manager across all or part of a network may be entrusted to several different entities or companies.
Infrastructure Manager (IM) — As defined in Article 3(2) of Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 November 2012 establishing a single European railway area (OJ L 343, 14.12.2012, p. 32).
Infrastructure manager (IM) — See IM
Infrastructure Manager (IM) — An  infrastructure  manager  as  defined  in  point  (2)  of  Article  3  of  Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (1).
Infrastructure Manager (IM) — As  defined  in  point  (2)  of  Article  3  of  Directive 2012/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (1).
Infrastructure Manager (IM) — Any body or undertaking that is responsible in particular for establishing and maintaining railway infrastructure, or part thereof, as defined in Article 3 of Directive 91/440/EEC, which may also include the management of infrastructure control and safety systems. The functions of the infrastructure manager on a network or on part of a network may be allocated to different bodies or undertakings.
Infrastructure Manager (IM) — Any body or firm responsible for establishing, managing and maintaining railway infrastructure, including traffic management and control-command and signalling. The functions of the IMs on a network or part of a network may be allocated to different bodies or firms.
Infrastructure manager (IM)'s code — Anybody or undertaking that is responsible in particular  for  establishing  and  maintaining  railway infrastructure or a part thereof.
Infrastructure Manager Performance Manager / IM Performance Manager — Person in charge who is responsible for the definition phase and the performance analyses process in Train Performance Management. This is also the responsible person for the IM who takes care of needed measures in his area to improve the punctuality.
Initial assessment framework — The initial assessment framework is the set of TSIs (i.e. this TSI, TSI NOI and TSI PRM) applicable at the beginning of the design phase when the notified body is contracted by the applicant
Initial assessment framework — The initial assessment framework is the set of TSIs (this TSI and the TSI NOI) applicable at the beginning of the design phase when the notified body is contracted by the applicant.
Initial assessment framework for CCS On-Board Subsystem — It is the CCS TSI applicable at the beginning of the design phase when the notified body for the CCS on-board Subsystem is contracted by the applicant.
Initiating applicant — The applicant holding the rights to the allocated path and placing the path modification/cancellation request.
Initiating event (IE) — In Bow-tie Terminology: The first causes upstream of each branch leading to the critical event in the fault tree (on the left end of the bowtie).
Initiating infrastructure manager — The infrastructure manager triggering a path alteration with an international impact
Initiating infrastructure manager — The infrastructure manager on whose network the incident has occured.
Initiating pair — The initiating infrastructure manager and the applicant holding the rights to the initially allocated path on the network of the initiating IM are together referred to as the initiating pair.
Injury accident — Any accident involving at least one rail vehicle in motion, resulting in at least one killed or injured person. Accidents in workshops, warehouses and depots are excluded. This definition includes accidents with slightly injured persons and is similar to that used in road accident statistics.
Inland transport — It covers all transport activities that go over land, i.e. all modes but air and maritime transport. It hence includes transport by road, by rail, on inland waterways (both passengers and goods) and through pipelines (goods only).
Inland transport of dangerous goods — The rail, road and inland waterways transport of dangerous goods from the time of loading such dangerous goods on board a transport unit to the time of unloading them.
Inland waterway — A navigable inland waterway is a waterway on which vessels with a carrying capacity of not less than 50 tonnes can navigate when normally loaded. Included are waterways of maritime character, waterways designated by the reporting country as suitable for navigation primarily by seagoing ships. A waterway is a river, canal, lake or other stretch of water, that is not part of the sea, which through natural or man-made features is suitable for navigation. This term includes both navigable rivers and lakes and navigable canals. The length of rivers and canals is measured in mid-channel. The length of lakes and lagoons is measured along the shortest navigable route between the two most distant points that perform transport operations. A waterway forming a common frontier between two countries is reported by both states. Waterways also include river estuaries, the boundary with the sea being that point nearest the sea where the width of the river is both less than 3 kilometres (km) at low water and less then 5 km at high water.
Inmarsat — International Maritime Satellite Organisation
Inner coupling — Is the mechanical interface between elements forming a unit.
Inner coupling (also called intermediate coupling) — The coupling device between vehicles in order to form a unit composed of several vehicles (e.g. a fixed rake of coaches or a trainset).
Inner packaging — A packaging for which an outer packaging is required for carriage.
Inner receptacle — A receptacle which requires an outer packaging in order to perform its containment function.
Inner vessel — For a closed cryogenic receptacle, the pressure vessel intendedto contain the refrigerated liquefied gas.
Inspection — Examination of a product, service, process or installation and/or their design and determination of its conformity with specific requirements or, on the basis of professional judgment, with general requirements NOTE Inspection of processes may include personnel, facilities, technology or methodology. (ISO 17000:2005, § 4.3.)
Inspection body — An independent inspection and testing body approved by the competent authority.
Installation — Phase after delivery at customer premises and prior to commissioning (3.1.2.1). Note 1 to entry: Installation is a typical phase of infrastructure activities.
Instantaneous friction coefficient — Value of friction coefficient at any one instant
Instructions and documentation for operation — Parameter without explanation in the document
Instructions for operation in normal and degraded modes of the vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
Insulated wagon — Covered wagon the body of which is built with insulating walls, doors, floor and roof, to limit heat exchange between the interior of the wagon and the outside so that the overall coefficient of heat transfer (K coefficient), allows the equipment to be assigned to one or other of the following two categories: •	IN = Normally insulated: characterised by a K coefficient equal to or less than 0.7 W/m 2°C. •	IR = Heavily insulated: characterised by a K coefficient equal to or less than 0.4 W/m 2°C. Wagon for the perishable freights (meat, fish, oil, vegetables, fruit etc.). There are mechanically refrigerated wagons (mechanical refrigeration and electric heating) and refrigerated wagons (water ice refrigerating or salt ice and heating by temporary ovens) depending on refrigeration method and heating method. Sometimes also referred to as insulated car.
Insulation of pantograph from the vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
INTAS — International Association for the Promotion of Cooperation with Scientists from the new independent States of the former Soviet Union
Integrated company — Railway transport operator also being an infrastructure manager.
Integrated public passenger transport services — Interconnected transport services within a determined geographical area with a single information service, ticketing scheme and timetable.
Integrated Reservation Tickets - IRT — A kind of train ticket restricted to a specific train on a specific date/time. A IRT ticket can only be sold by means of an online transaction between the sales terminal and the attributing system where the relevant train is hosted
Integration requirement — Requirement of a product or service to describe how a constitutive system/subsystem/component interfaces with others, to perform an integrated function EXAMPLE:Weight, external dimension, kinematic envelope, power supply requirements, network (communication). Note 1 to entry: See Annex B.
Integrity — The fact that a record is complete and unaltered.
Integrity of software employed for safety related functions — Requirements concerning the integrity of software related to safety-related functions with impact on the train behaviour, e.g. integrity of software of train bus.
Intelligent Transport Systems or ITS — As defined in Article 4, point (1), of Directive 2010/40/EU.
Intelsat — International Telecommunications Satellite Organisation
Intend to run — There is a realistic and agreed plan between RU/IM to operate in a certain part of the network
Interchange — The Transfer of control from one railway undertaking to another for practical operational and safety reasons. Examples are: - Mixed services, - Services with shared haulage responsibility, - The transfer of information between different railway administrations, - The transfer of information between wagon owners/keepers and train operators.
Interchange between Carriers — The transfer of control from one railway undertaking to another for practical operational, safety and liability reasons. Examples are: - successive railway undertakings, - trains with substitute carriers, - the transfer of information between different railway undertakings
Interchange point — Location of train’s journey or of a path where the transfer of responsibility for the whole train from one Responsible RU to another Responsible RU takes place.
Interchange point — The location where the control of the train is transferred from one railway undertaking to another railway undertaking Regarding a train running, the train is taken over from one railway undertaking by the other railway undertaking, which now owns the path for the next section of the journey
Intercirculation doors — Doors in connection between vehicles which can be at the end of the train.
Interested parties — See “Stakeholders”.
Interested party — Person or organisation that can affect, be affected by, or perceive itself to be affected by a decision or activity (ISO 9000) related to the safety management system.
Interface to refuelling equipment for non-electric rolling stock — Requirements concerning refuelling system for rolling stock using diesel fuel, LPG or other combustibles.
Interface with service brake — Interface requirements with the service brake for the set of specifications No 1 in Table A2 of the Annex A to the CCS TSI laid down in Decision 2012/88/EU.
Interfaces — All points of interaction during a system or subsystem life cycle, including operation and maintenance where different actors of the rail sector will work together in order to manage the risks.
Interfaces — Interfaces as defined in Article 3(7) of Commission Regulation (EC) No 352/2009
Interference current under the vehicle — Interference currents circulating under the vehicle between the axles and mainly produced by on-board equipment.
Intergovernmental Organisation for International Carriage by Rail (OTIF) — The Intergovernmental Organisation for International Carriage by Rail governs international rail transport. As of 2013, 46 European, African, and Near Eastern states are members.
Interinstitutional agreement (IIA) — agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management between the European Institutions: the IIA is adopted by common agreement of the European Parliament, the Council, and the Commission. It contains the table of the financial framework, as well as the rules to implement it
Interior — Parameter without explanation in the document
Interior doors — Requirements concerning the design of interior doors.
Interior layout — General requirements concerning the cab interior layout such as anthropometric measurements of the driver, freedom of movement of personnel in the cab interior, seated and standing driving positions, number of seats (e.g. depending on one or two man operation).
Interior lighting — Requirements concerning passenger related lighting (not technical equipment lighting and signal lights or emergency lighting that is covered by parameter 10.2.4 - Emergency lighting).
Interlocking — A general term applied to the controlling of the setting and releasing of “signals” and “points” to prevent unsafe conditions arising, and equipment which performs this function.
Intermediate bulk container (IBC) — A rigid, or flexible portable packaging, other than those specified in Chapter 6.1, that: (a) has a capacity of: (i) not more than 3.0 m3 for solids and liquids of packing groups II and III; (ii) not more than 1.5 m3 for solids of packing group I when packed in flexible, rigid plastics, composite, fibreboard and wooden IBCs; (iii) not more than 3.0 m3 for solids of packing group I when packed in metal IBCs; (iv) not more than 3.0 m3 for radioactive material of Class 7; (b) is designed for mechanical handling; (c) is resistant to the stresses produced in handling and transport as determined by the tests specified in Chapter 6.5 (see also "Composite IBC with plastics inner receptacle", "Fibreboard IBC", "Flexible IBC", "Metal IBC", "Rigid plastics IBC" and "Wooden IBC"); NOTE 1: Portable tanks or tank-containers that meet the requirements of Chapter 6.7 or 6.8 respectively are not considered to be intermediate bulk containers (IBCs). NOTE 2: Intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) which meet the requirements of Chapter 6.5 are not considered to be containers for the purposes of RID. See also "Remanufactured IBC", "Repaired IBC", "Routine maintenance of flexible IBCs" "Routine maintenance of rigid IBCs"
Intermediate packaging — A packaging placed between inner packagings or articles, and an outer packaging.
Intermediate point — Location which defines a point of a train’s journey or path between its start (origin) or end (destination) point.
Intermediate Statement of Verification — The document established either by the notified body selected by the applicant, in the case of TSI requirements, or by a designated body, in the case of requirements stemming from national rules, which registers the results of a stage of the verification procedure.
Intermidiate point — The location which defines the start or end point of a journey section. This may be an interchange, handover or handling point, for example
Intermidiate point — Feeder and outflow connections are possible. If the path request ends at an Intermediate Point without indication of a further path, feeder/outflow or additional PaP section, the destination terminal / parking facility of the train can be mentioned. Intermediate Points also allow stops for train handling, e.g. loco change, driver change, etc. An Intermediate Point can be combined with a Handover Point.
Intermittent sound — nNoise that occurs at regular or irregular time intervals and is such that the duration of each such occurrence is more than about 5 s. Note 1 to entry: Adapted from ISO 1996‑1:2003. Note 2 to entry: This definition does not apply to a whole pass-by event. Note 3 to entry: Intermittence should be assessed relatively to the duration of the event. Note 4 to entry: Examples: compressor, cooling fans.
Intermittent source — Source that operate at regular or irregular time intervals and is such that its duration is short. EXAMPLE:Noise from compressors, exhaust fans, door operation, toilet.
Intermittent transmission — A term that encompasses “SPOT TRANSMISSION” and “SEMI- CONTINUOUS TRANSMISSION”.
Intermodal freight transport — Multimodal transport of goods, in one and the same intermodal transport unit by successive modes of transport without handling of the goods themselves when changing modes. The intermodal transport unit can be a container, swap body or a loaded vehicle travelling on another vehicle. The return movement of empty containers/swap bodies and empty goods road vehicles/trailers are not themselves part of intermodal transport since no goods are being moved. Nevertheless, such movements are associated with intermodal transport.
Intermodal Loading Unit — Containers, swap bodies and semi-trailers suitable for combined transport
Intermodal Loading Unit (ILU) — Loading which is suitable for intermodal transport on road, rail and inland waterways or sea. It is a synonym of ITU (Intermodal Transport Unit) as defined in the “Glossary for transport statistics”.
Intermodal Service Integrator — Any body or undertaking, which has the contract with customers for the transport of Intermodal units. He is preparing waybills, managing capacity on block trains etc.
Intermodal terminal — Location which provides the space, equipment and operational environment under which the loading units (freight containers, swap bodies, semi-trailers or trailers) transfer takes place.
Intermodal transport — The movement of goods in one and the same loading unit or vehicle, which uses successively several modes of transport without handling of the goods themselves in changing modes.
Intermodal transport — The movement of goods in one and the same loading unit or road vehicle, which uses successively two or more modes of transport without handling the goods themselves in changing modes.
Intermodal transport operation — (a) the combined transport operations defined in Article 1 of Council Directive 92/106/EEC ( 3 ) engaged in the transport of one or more containers or swap bodies, up to a total maximum length of 45 feet; or (b) transport operations engaged in the transport of one or more containers or swap bodies, up to a total maximum length of 45 feet, using waterborne transport, provided that the length of the initial or the final road leg does not exceed 150 km in the territory of the Union. The distance of 150 km referred to above may be exceeded in order to reach the nearest suitable transport terminal for the envisaged service in the case of:      (i) vehicles complying with point 2.2.2(a) or (b) of Annex I; or      (ii) vehicles complying with point 2.2.2(c) or (d) of Annex I, in cases where such distances are     permitted in the relevant Member State. For intermodal transport operations, the nearest suitable transport terminal providing a service may be located in a Member State other than the Member State in which the shipment was loaded or unloaded.
Intermodal transport terminal — A structure equipped for the transhipment and storage of intermodal transport units (ITUs) between at least two transport modes or between two different rail systems, and for temporary storage of freight, such as ports, inland ports, airports and rail-road terminals. Intermodal Transport Terminals often perform as hubs in a ‘Hub and Spoke’ distribution concept which relates to collection through a central point (the hub) and distribution in various directions (the spokes). The hub is a central point for the collection, sorting, transhipment and distribution of goods for a particular region.
Intermodal transport unit (itu) — Container, swap body or semi-trailer/goods road motor vehicle suitable for intermodal transport.
Intermodal Transpot Unit (ITU) — Containers, swap bodies and semi-trailers suitable for intermodal transport.
Intermodality — Used to describe a system of transport whereby two or more modes of transport are used to transport the same loading unit or truck in an integrated manner, without loading or unloading, in a [door to door] transport chain2.
Internal  connection — Describes  the  internal  connectivity  between  the  tracks  of  the operational  point  and  it  is  presented  like  a  from-to  network relation,  where  From  and  To  are  the  names  of  the  tracks connecting  each  other
Internal IT service provider — A Commission department providing shared IT services.
Internal operator — A legally distinct entity over which a competent local authority, or in the case of a group of authorities at least one competent local authority, exercises control similar to that exercised over its own departments.
Internalisation — Incorporation of an externality into the market decision making process through pricing or regulatory intervention. In the narrow sense, internalisation is achieved by charging polluters (for example) with the damage costs of the pollution generated by them, in accordance with the polluter pays principle.
Internally illuminated safety sign — Safety sign that is illuminated, when required, by an internal source.
International Accreditation Forum (IAF) — The IAF is the world association of Conformity Assessment Accreditation Bodies and other bodies interested in conformity assessment in the fields of management systems, products, services, personnel and other similar programmes of conformity assessment (www.iaf.nu )
International carriage — A journey undertaken by a vehicle, the point of departure of which is on the territory of one Contracting Party and the destination of which is on the territory of the other Contracting Party or in a third country, or vice versa, and the movement of an unladen vehicle in connection with the aforesaid journey; if the point of departure or the destination of the journey is located in a third country, carriage must be effected by a vehicle registered in the Contracting Party where the point of departure or the destination of the journey is located.
International contingency management (ICM) — The process aims to describe standards that allow continuation of freight and passenger traffic flows, if national rules allow, at the highest possible level despite an international disruption and to assure transparency of the status of the disruption and its impact on traffic flows for all relevant stakeholders across Europe.
International disruption — International disruption is an unplanned disruption defined by its duration of more than three calendar days and with high impact on international traffic.  or For the purpose of this handbook, an international disruption is an unplanned disruption defined by its duration (based on the recovery forecast) and its impact on international train operations: » Duration: current and expected disruptions with a forecasted impact on the affected sec-tion of more than three calendar days. » Impact: disruptions with a high impact on international traffic. The impact of an incident is assessed by using business know-how (e.g. knowledge about passenger / freight flows) and by considering available re-routing options (see re-routing scenario). Additionally, a high impact can be assumed, as a rule of thumb, if 50% of the trains on the affected sec-tion need an operational treatment. This can also be caused by a combination of several small incidents adding up to a high impact on railway operations.
International freight service — A transport service where the train crosses at least one border of a Member State; the train may be joined and/or split and the different sections may have different origins and destinations, provided that all wagons cross at least one border.
International goods transport by rail - loaded (outgoing) — Goods carried by rail between a place of loading (on a railway vehicle) located in the declaring country and a place of unloading from a railway vehicle in another country. Goods in transit throughout are not included. Wagons loaded on a railway network and carried by ferry to a foreign network are included.
International goods transport by rail - unloaded (incoming) — Goods carried by rail between a place of loading (on a railway vehicle) located in a foreign country and a place of unloading from a railway vehicle in the declaring country. Goods in transit throughout are not included. Wagons loaded on a foreign railway network and carried by ferry to the reporting network are included.
International grouping — Any association of at least two railway undertakings established in different Member States of the Community, or, in the case of one of them, in Switzerland, for the purpose of providing international transport services between the Community and Switzerland.
International journey — A passenger journey by rail crossing the border of at least one Member State
International loaded — Place of loading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of unloading in a different country.
International maritime bunkers — They describe the quantities of fuel oil delivered to ships of all flags that are engaged in international navigation. It is the fuel used to power these ships. International navigation may take place at sea, on inland lakes and waterways, and in coastal waters. International maritime bunkers do not include fuel oil consumption by: - ships engaged in domestic navigation; whether a vessel is engaged in domestic or international navigation is determined only by the ship's port of departure and port of arrival - not by the flag or nationality of the ship; - fishing vessels; - military forces.
International organisation — An organisation and its subordinate bodies governed by public international law, or any other body which is set up by, or on the basis of, an agreement between two or more countries.
International passenger service — A passenger service where the train crosses at least one border of a Member State and where the principal purpose of the service is to carry passengers between stations located in different Member States; the train may be joined and/or split, and the different sections may have different origins and destinations, provided that all carriages cross at least one border.
International qualification — A qualification awarded by a legally established international body (association, organisation, sector or company) or by a national body acting on behalf of an international body that is used in more than one country and that includes learning outcomes assessed with reference to standards established by an international body
International rail passenger service — A rail passenger service which crosses a border of at least one Member State
International rail passenger service — A rail passenger service crossing at least one border of a Member State the principal purpose of which is to carry passengers between stations located in different Member States or in a Member State and a third country.
International rail transport — Rail transport where the goods are either loaded or unloaded, but not both, in the reporting Member State, with a distinction between goods loaded and goods unloaded.
International railway transport — Railway transport between a place (of loading/embarkation or of unloading/disembarkation) in one country and a place (of loading/embarkation or of unloading/disembarkation) in another country. It may involve transit through one or more additional countries. To avoid double counting, each country only counts the pkm or tkm performed on its territory. The number of passengers or the weight of the freight transported is counted in each country.
International road freight transport — It is defined as the transport by road between two places (a place of loading and a place of unloading) in two different countries irrespective of the country in which the vehicle is registered. It is composed of 4 categories: International loaded: Place of loading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of unloading in a different country. International unloaded: Place of unloading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of loading in a different country. Cross-trade Cabotage
International sale — The sale of a train ticket for an international journey
International sales — The sale of a train ticket for an international journey (from the TAP glossary)
International sales — The sale of a train ticket for an international journey
International Standard — A standard adopted by an international standardisation body.
International standardisation body — The International Organisation for Standardisation (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) and the International Telecommunication Union (ITU).
International traffic — The circulation of vehicles on railway lines over the territory of at least two Contracting States.
International transport — Rail transport between a place (of loading/embarkation or unloading/disembarkation) in the reporting country and a place (of loading/embarkation or unloading/disembarkation) in another country.
International unloaded — Place of unloading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of loading in a different country.
Internationally harmonised timetable — A timetable according to which the applicants can perform a train run; the days and border-times are aligned.
Internet exchange point — A network facility which enables the interconnection of more than two independent networks (autonomous systems), primarily for the purpose of facilitating the exchange of internet traffic, which provides interconnection only for autonomous systems and which neither requires the internet traffic passing between any pair of participating autonomous systems to pass through any third autonomous system nor alters or otherwise interferes with such traffic.
Interoperability — The ability of a rail system to allow the safe and uninterrupted movement of trains which accomplish the required levels of performance.
Interoperability — The ability to allow the safe and uninterrupted movement of trains that accomplish the specified levels of performance. (1)
Interoperability — A property referring to the ability of diverse systems and organizations to work together (inter-operate). The term is often used in a technical systems engineering sense, or alternatively in a broad sense, taking into account social, political, and organizational factors that impact system-to-system performance. DIRECTIVE 2016/797/EU, Art. 2: 'the ability of a rail system to allow the safe and uninterrupted movement of trains which accomplish the required levels of performance'. UNISIG definition of operational interoperability in European railway area: the ability to enable the international safe running of trains on different European networks without having to stop the train at borders; changing the engine at borders; changing the driver at borders; requiring the train driver to perform any other activity other than the standardised ERTMS operation. More generally, in order to overcome the technical fragmentation of rail networks in Europe, the interoperability directives of the European Union are gradually establishing mandatory Technical Specifications for Interoperability, commonly referred to as TSIs.
Interoperability — The ability, including in the light of all the regulatory, technical, administrative and operational conditions, of the infrastructure, including digital infrastructure in a transport mode or segment and between different transport modes, to allow safe and uninterrupted traffic and information flows which achieve the required levels of performance for that infrastructure mode or segment.
Interoperability constituent — Any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem upon which the interoperability of the trans-European rail system directly or indirectly depends. The concept of a constituent covers both tangible objects and intangible objects, such as software.
Interoperability Constituent — Any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends either directly or indirectly. The concept of a constituent covers both tangible objects and intangible objects such as software.
Interoperability constituent (IC) — Any equipment incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends – covers both tangible objects and intangible objects such as software.
Interoperability constituents — Any elementary component, group of components, sub-assembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends directly or indirectly. The concept of a ‘constituent’ covers both tangible objects and intangible objects such as software.
Interoperability constituents — In accordance with Article 2(7) of Directive (EU) 2016/797, any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends directly or indirectly, including both tangible objects and intangible objects.
Interoperability constituents — According to Article 2(f) of Directive 2008/57/EC,means any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends directly or indirectly. The concept of a ‘constituent’ covers both tangible objects and intangible objects such as software.
Interoperability constituents — According to Article 2(7) of Directive (EU) 2016/797, the interoperability constituents are ‘any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends directly or indirectly.’ The concept of a ‘constituent’ covers both tangible objects and intangible objects such as software.
Interoperability constituents — Any elementary component, group of components, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem, upon which the interoperability of the rail system depends directly or indirectly, including both tangible objects and intangible objects.
Interoperability constituents — The interoperability constituents as defined in point (7) of Article 2 of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Interoperability regulatory sandbox — A controlled environment set up by a Union entity or a public sector body for the development, training, testing and validation of innovative interoperability solutions, where appropriate in real world conditions, supporting the cross-border interoperability of trans-European digital public services for a limited period of time under regulatory supervision.
Interoperability solution — A reusable asset concerning legal, organisational, semantic or technical requirements to enable cross-border interoperability, such as conceptual frameworks, guidelines, reference architectures, technical specifications, standards, services and applications, as well as documented technical components, such as source code.
Interoperability, operational — The set of harmonised operating rules that enables interoperability.
Interoperability, technical — The set of harmonised technical requirements that enables interoperability. The ERTMS/ETCS specification defines the requirements for technical interoperability.
Interoperable cross-border services — Cross-border services for which at least two safety certificates as stipulated by Directive 2001/14/EC are required from the railway undertakings.
Interoperable wheelchair transportable by train — An interoperable wheelchair transportable by train is a wheelchair the characteristics of which permit the full usage of all features of rolling stock designed for wheelchair users. The characteristics of an interoperable wheelchair transportable by train are within the limits specified in Appendix M.
Interprise — Programme for the improvement of the business environment and the promotion of the development of enterprises, and in particular small and medium-sized enterprises
Interreg II — Initiative concerning border development, cross-border cooperation and selected energy networks
Intersection point (IP) — Theoretical intersection point of the running edges at the centre of the crossing
Intervention — Where ERTMS/ETCS takes control from the driver by cutting traction power or applying the full service brake and cutting traction power or applying the emergency brake and cutting traction power.
Intervention Limit — The value, which, if exceeded, requires corrective main tenance in order that the immediate action limit shall not be reached before the next inspection.
Intrastat — Statistical collection system
Inventory — The list of accommodations offered on the trains of an RU that can be booked. Each accommodation of each train is stored in the inventory separately per each day of train running
Investigation — A process conducted for the purpose of accident and incident prevention which includes the gathering and analysis of information, the drawing of conclusions, including the determination of causes and,   when appropriate, the making of safety recommendations.
Investigation — A process conducted for the purpose of accident and incident prevention which includes the gathering and analysis of information, the drawing of conclusions, including the determination of causes and, when appropriate, the making of safety recommendations (Directive (EU) 2016/798).
Investigation — A process conducted for the purpose of accident and incident prevention which includes the gathering and analysis of information, the drawing of conclusions, including the determination of causes (actions, omissions, events or conditions, or a combination thereof, which led to the accident or incident) and, when appropriate, the making of safety recommendations.
Investigator-in-charge — A person responsible for the organisation, conduct and control of an investigation.
Investment expenditure on railways infrastructure — Capital expenditure on new railway infrastructure or extension of existing railways, including reconstruction, renewal (major substitution work on the existing infrastructure which does not change its overall performance) and upgrades (major modification work improving the original performance or capacity of the infrastructure). Infrastructure includes land, permanent way constructions, buildings, bridges and tunnels, as well as immovable fixtures, fittings and installations connected with them (signalisation, telecommunications, catenaries, electricity sub-stations, etc.) as opposed to rolling stock.
Investment expenditure on rolling stock — Capital expenditure to purchase railway vehicles or to upgrade existing ones.
Investment plan — 'The management board [of the RFC] shall draw up and periodically review an investment plan, which includes details of indicative medium and long-term investment for infrastructure in the freight corridor, and shall submit it for approval to the executive board. This plan shall include:  a) the list of the projects foreseen for the extension, renewal or redeployment of railway infrastructure and its equipment along the freight corridor and the relevant financial requirements and sources of finance, b) a deployment plan relating to the interoperable systems along the freight corridor which satisfies the essential requirements and the technical specifications for interoperability which apply to the network as defined in Directive 2008/57/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the interoperability of the rail system within the Community......., c) a plan for the management of the capacity of freight trains which may run on the freight corridor, which includes removing the identified bottlenecks.........,  d) where applicable, reference to the contribution of the Union envisaged under financial programmes of the Union.'
IO — British Indian Ocean Territory (the)
IOD — Interoperability Directive
IOTC — Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
IP — The Internet Protocol
IP — Internet Protocol
IPCC — Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IQ — Iraq
IR — Iran (Islamic Republic of)
IR — Individual risk
IRDAC — Industrial Research and Development Advisory Committee
IRIS — Interrogation requirements information system
Irradiance — Quotient of the radiant heat flux incident on an infinitesimal element of surface containing the point, by area of that element
Irradiance — (At a point of a surface) quotient of the radiant flux incident on an infinitesimal element of surface containing the point, and the area of that element. Note 1 to entry: Convective heating is negligible in the horizontal specimen orientation. For this reason, the term “irradiance” is used instead of “heat flux” throughout this part of ISO 5660 as it best indicates the essentially radiative mode of heat transfer.
Irregularities — Any infringement of a provision of European law resulting from an act or omission by an economic operator, which has, or would have, the effect of prejudicing the general budget of the Communities or budgets managed by them, either by reducing or losing revenue accruing from own resources collected directly on behalf of the Union, or by an unjustified item of expenditure.
IRSE — Institution of Railway Signal Engineers
IRT — Integrated Reservation Ticket - Means a kind of train ticket restricted to a specific train on a specific date/time. A IRT ticket can only be sold by means of an online transaction between the sales terminal and the attributing system where the relevant train is hosted.
IRT (Integrated Reservation Ticket) — Ticket which is issued as an international or national ticket and in which a compulsory reservation is integrated (2)
IRT [Integrated Reservation Ticket] — Ticket which is issued as an international or national ticket and in which a compulsory reservation is integrated. IRT GTV-CIT
IRTHP — International Rail Ticket for Home Printing; ticket which is issued over the internet and printed out on DIN A4 paper by passengers using their own printers. Forms part of the class of e-tickets. IRTHP GTV-CIT
IS — Isolation mode
IS — Iceland
Is the ETCS trackside engineered to transmit Track Conditions — According to the specification referenced in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C] If the trackside does not provide Track Conditions,  the driver will need to be informed about such conditions via alternative methods
ISA — Independent Safety Assessment Body
ISBN — International standard book number
ISDN — Integrated services digital network
ISG — Interinstitutional Style Guide
ISIC — International Standard Industrial Classification of all Economic Activities
ISIC/Rev.4 — International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic Activities, United Nations Statistics Division
ISIS — Integrated standards information system
ISO — International Organisation for Standardisation
ISO — International Organization for Standardization
ISO — International Standardisation Organisation
ISO — International Organization for Standardization
ISO — International Organization for standardization
ISO (standard) — An international standard published by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) (ISO, 1, rue de Varembé, CH-1204 Geneva 20).
Isolated defect — A discrete track geometry fault.
Isolated network — A rail network of a Member State, or part thereof, with a track gauge different from that of the European standard nominal track gauge of 1 435 mm.
Isolation mode — When the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment is disconnected from the vehicle braking system. Isolation is indicated to the driver.
ISSN — International standard serial number
Issuer — An undertaking selling the ticket and receiving payment. May be a carrier and/or a distributor. The issuer is the undertaking indicated on the ticket with its code and possibly its logo
Issuer — An undertaking selling the ticket and receiving payment. May be a carrier and/or a distributor. The issuer is the undertaking indicated on the ticket with its code and possibly its logo (from the TAP glossary)
Issuing undertaking — Undertaking concluding the contract of carriage on its own behalf or in the name of and for the account of another carrier which issues the ticket and receives the payment. The issuing undertaking is indicated on the ticket with its UIC code and, where appropriate, its symbol. It may at the same time be a sales point, attributor, carrier, distributor and/or ticket control organisation (TCO). The term “issuer” is not to be used
ISV — Intermediate Statement Verification
ISV — Intermediate Statement of Verification
IT — Information Technology
IT — Italy
IT — Information technology
it — Italian
IT security guidelines — They consist of recommended but voluntary measures that help support IT security standards or serve as a reference when no applicable standard is in place.
IT security incident — An event that could adversely affect the confidentiality, integrity or availability of a CIS.
IT security measure — A technical or organisational measure aimed at mitigating IT security risks,
IT security need — A precise and unambiguous definition of the levels of confidentiality, integrity and availability associated with a piece of information or an IT system with a view to determining the level of protection required.
IT security objective — A statement of intent to counter specified threats and/or satisfy specified organisational security requirements or assumptions.
IT security or Security of CIS — The preservation of confidentiality, integrity and availability of CISs and the data sets that they process.
IT security plan — The documentation of the IT security measures required to meet the IT security needs of a CIS.
IT security policy — A set of IT security objectives, which are or have to be established, implemented and checked. It comprises this decision and its implementing rules.
IT security requirement — A formalised IT security need through a predefined process.
IT security risk — An effect that an IT security threat might induce on a CIS by exploiting a vulnerability. As such, an IT security risk is characterised by two factors: (1) uncertainty, i.e. the likelihood of an IT security threat to cause an unwanted event; and (2) impact, i.e. the consequences that such an unwanted event may have on a CIS.
IT security standards — Specific mandatory IT security measures that help enforce and support the IT security policy.
IT security strategy — A set of projects and activities which are designed to achieve the objectives of the Commission and which have to be established, implemented and checked.
IT security threat — A factor that can potentially lead to an unwanted event which may result in harm to a CIS. Such threats may be accidental or deliberate and are characterised by threatening elements, potential targets and attack methods.
ITER — International thermonuclear experimental reactor
ITF — International Transport Forum
Itinerary segment — Section of the route of a train, usually defined in order to describe service elements and facilities that are available for only part of the route. Synonym : travel segment
ITU — Intermodal Transport Unit
IU — Influencing Unit
IUCN — International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
IWG.Trans — Intersecretariat Working Group on Transport Statistics
IWT — Inland Waterway Transport
IWW — Inland waterways
J/s — Joules per second
JE — Jersey
Jerrican — A metal or plastics packaging of rectangular or polygonal cross-section with one or more orifices.
JET — Joint European Torus
Jet fire — The handling of pressurised flammable liquid or gas can lead to a jet fire in case of a leak on a pipe or on a vessel. The fluid ignition lead to form a jet flame characterised by a high radiant energy (largely higher than pool fire radiation) and by a noticeable kinetic energy.
Jet fire — Combustion of a flammable substance that flows, in a jet form, from an opening/breach of a pressurised shell.
JICS — Joint Interpreting and Conference Service (European Commission; replaced by the Directorate-General for Interpretation)
JM — Jamaica
JO — Jordan
Joining technology — Requirements to the joints and to the joining technologies (welding, gluing, screwing, bolting, etc.).
Joining to — The operation by which two trains, having run separately until now, meet in a station and are there coupled to each other to continue the journey together but keeping each its original train number
Joint authority — An authority established by mutual agreement between two or more Member States to facilitate the permit-granting procedures related to cross-border projects, including joint authorities established by designated authorities where those designated authorities have been empowered by Member States to establish joint authorities.
Joint carrier — A carrier linked by a cooperation agreement to one or more other carriers for the operation of a transport service. (from the TAP glossary)
Joint Undertakings (JUs) — A legal EU body established under the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU. The term can be used to describe any collaborative structure proposed for the “efficient execution of Union research, technological development and demonstration programmes”
JOPP — Joint venture Phare programme
Journey — A ‘journey’ denotes the spatial forwarding of a train or of a loaded or empty wagon from the forwarding station to the destination station.
Journey — The movement of a passenger (or several passengers travelling together) from a location A to a location B
Journey — Scheduled movement of a vehicle along a single route. [RD2]
Journey — The carriage of a passenger between a station of departure and a station of arrival.
Journey — General definition: the route between the depot, siding, platform line or other authorised place where the train enters service and the depot, siding, platform line or other authorised place where the train reaches its destination, or: • is required to reverse before continuing to its destination • is required to have vehicles attached or detached • is required to terminate short of its destination, as a result of infrastructure fault, line blockage, defective on-train equipment or any other operational reason.
Journey planner — An IT system able to propose journey solutions
Journey Profile — The Journey Profile describes the information needed by the train to be aware about the path the train should take, timetable information and temporary constraints.
Journey section — Is the part of the journey which takes place on an infrastructure sector of an infrastructure manager or part of the journey from the entry handover point to the exit handover point of the infrastructure of an infrastructure manager.
Journey section — Part of the journey which takes place on one infrastructure sector of an infrastructure manager, or part of the journey from the entry handover point to the exit handover point of the infrastructure of one infrastructure manager. For journey sections applying to passenger trains, please refer to definition above.
Journey solution — It is a set of one or more commercial transport services answering at least the question ‘How can I go from location A to location B at a given departure/arrival date And time?’. The question could contain more complex additional criteria, such as ‘in the fastest way’, ‘in the cheapest way’, ‘with no changes’, etc. The passenger can build the journey solutions by him/herself, consulting different information sources, or the solution can be offered to him/her by a journey Planner
JP — Journey Profile
JP — Japan
JPAck — Journey Profile Acknowledgement
JPC — Joint Programming Committee of CEN/CENELEC/ETSI
JPCR — Joint Programming Committee Rail
JPReq — Journey Profile Request
JRC — Joint Research Centre
JRU — Juridical Recorder Unit
Juridical data — Data to record all actions and exchanges relating to the movement of trains sufficient for off line analysis of all events leading to an incident.
Justified doubt — An issue classified as ‘type 4’ according to Article 41(1)(d), with a justification and supporting evidence, raised by the authorising entity and/or the NSAs for the area of use concerning the information provided by the applicant in its application.
JWG — Joint Working Group
KBS — Knowledge-based system
KE — Kenya
Keeper — The person or entity that, being the owner of a vehicle or having the right to use it, exploits the vehicle as a means of transport and is registered as such in the national vehicle register referred to in Article 22 and 47 of the Interoperability Directive.
Keeper — The person, who being the owner or having the right to dispose of it, exploits a vehicle economically in a permanent manner as a means of transport and is registered as such in the Rolling Stock Register.
Keeper — The person who, being the owner of a vehicle or having the right to use it, exploits such vehicle economically in a permanent manner as a means of transport and is registered as such in the Rolling Stock Register
Keeper — The natural or legal person that, being the owner of a vehicle or having the right to use it, exploits the vehicle as a means of transport and is registered as such in a vehicle register referred to in Article 47.
Keeper — The natural or legal person that, being the owner of a vehicle or having the right to use it, exploits the vehicle as a means of transport and is registered as such in a  vehicle  register  referred  to  in  Article  47  of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Keeper — The person or entity that, being the owner of a vehicle or having the right to use it, exploits the vehicle as a means of transport and is registered as such in the vehicle register referred to in Article 13 - Appendix G to the Convention.
Keeper — The person or entity that, being the owner of a wagon or having the right to use it, exploits the wagon as a means of transport and is registered as keeper of the wagon in the competent official vehicle register, or, if the wagon is not registered in the competent official vehicle register or such a register is not existing, the person or entity that has declared to the GCU Bureau to be keeper of the wagon.
KER — KVB, Ebicab, RSDD
KERNEL — The core of the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment.
Key — A predefined component or information necessary to be able to encrypt data or interpret encrypted data.
Key management — The generation, storage, secure distribution, deletion, archiving and application of key entries in accordance with the security policy in a KM domain.
Key management Centre — The entity responsible for key management functions in a KM domain.
Key management System — The set of entities and operational procedures taking part in the key distribution system.
Key performance indicator (KPI) — Performance indicator, selected by the top management, to evaluate the performance of the RQMS and its business objectives that is critical (3.1.1.7) to the sustained success of an organization. Note 1 to entry: A KPI can be a combination of several performance indicator (PIs). Note 2 to entry: See Figure 3.
Key validity period — The specific timespan during which a key is valid.
Kg — Kilogram
KG — Kyrgyzstan
KH — Cambodia
KI — Kiribati
KM — Key Management
Km — Kilometre
KM — Comoros (the)
km — Kilometre
KM domain — One KMC (Home KMC) and all the on-boards, RBCs and RIUs using that KMC for key management purposes.
Km/h — Kilometres per hour
KMAC — Authentication Key
KMC — Key Management Centre
KMS — Key Management System
KN — Saint Kitts and Nevis
Knowledge — The outcome of the assimilation of information through learning. Knowledge is the body of facts, principles, theories and practices that is related to a field of work or study. In the context of the EQF, knowledge is described as theoretical and/or factual
Known TCRs — TCRs not matching with the definition of late TCRs.
KP — Korea (the Democratic People's Republic of)
KPI — Key performance indicator
KR — Korea (the Republic of)
KTRANS — Transport Key
kW — Kilowatt
KW — Kuwait
kWh — Kilowatt–hour
KY — Cayman Islands (the)
KZ — Kazakhstan
L — Litre
L + C — Abbreviation in B.5 for “Length + Coding”
LA — Lao People's Democratic Republic (the)
Lack of conformity — A failure to perform or improper performance of the travel services included in a package;
Lamp controls — Parameter without explanation in the document
LAN — Local area network
Land Container — Container complying with International Railway Union (UIC) specifications, for use in rail-road combined transport.
Language — Includes spoken and signed languages and other forms of non-spoken languages.
Lapsing appropriations — Unused appropriations to be cancelled at the end of the financial year. Lapsing means the cancellation of all or part of the authorisation to make expenditures and/or incur liabilities that is represented by an appropriation
Large container — (a) a container which does not meet the definition of a small container; (b) in the meaning of the CSC, a container of a size such that the area enclosed by the four outer bottom corners is either (i) at least 14 m2 (150 square feet) or (ii) at least 7 m2 (75 square feet) if fitted with top corner fittings.
Large container — See "Container".
Large packging — A packaging consisting of an outer packaging which contains articles or inner packagings and which (a) is designed for mechanical handling; (b) exceeds 400 kg net mass or 450 litres capacity but has a volume of not more than 3.0 m3.  "Remanufactured large packaging" means a metal or rigid plastics large packaging that: (a) Is produced as a UN type from a non-UN type; or (b) Is converted from one UN design type to another UN design type. Remanufactured large packagings are subject to the same requirements of RID that apply to new large packagings of the same type (see also design type definition in 6.6.5.1.2); "Reused large packaging" means a large packaging to be refilled which has been examined and found free  of defects affecting the ability to withstand the performance tests; the term includes those which are refilled  with the same or similar compatible contents and are carried within distribution chains controlled by the consignor of the product;
Large salvage packaging — A special packaging which (a) is designed for mechanical handling; and (b) exceeds 400 kg net mass or 450 litres capacity but has a volume of not more than 3 m3; into which damaged, defective, leaking or non-conforming dangerous goods packages, or dangerous goods that have spilled or leaked are placed for purposes of carriage for recovery or disposal.
Large-scale cybersecurity incident — An incident which causes a level of disruption that exceeds a Member State’s capacity to respond to it or which has a significant impact on at least two Member States.
LASH — Light-aboard-ship
Last relevant balise group — The LRBG is the last balise group marked as linked encountered by the train, whose message is accepted by the ERTMS/ETCS on-board. It is used as a common location reference between the ERTMS/ETCS on-board and trackside equipment.
Late path request — Late path requests are capacity requests concerning the annual timetable sent to the C-OSS or IM within the time frame from X-7.5 until X-2.
Late request — A request for access to a service facility or a rail related service submitted after the expiry of a deadline for submitting requests defined by the operator of the facility in question.
Late TCRs — All TCRs that are defined after the last publication deadlines (defined by Commission Delegated Decision (EU) 2017/2075 (Annex VII))
Lateral deviation — Lateral stagger of contact wire in maximum crosswind.
Lateral spread of flame — Progression of the flame front in a lateral direction over the specimen length.
Lb — Pound
LB — Lebanon
LC — Saint Lucia
LCC — Life cycle cost
LCL — Less than Container Loads
Lday — The noise indicator for annoyance during the day period, as further defined in Annex I.
LDC — Least developed country
Lden — The noise indicator for overall annoyance, as further defined in Annex I.
Lead Railway Undertaking — Applicant/RU, which is responsible to organise and manage the transport line according to the customer’s commitment. It is the single point of contact for the customer. If more than one Railway Undertaking is involved in the transport chain, the LRU is responsible for the coordination of the various Railway Undertakings on the harmonization of train’s journey including the various path requests.
Leader — Links between actions for the development of the rural economy
Leadership — Commitment to the development and implementation of the maintenance system of the organisation and to the continuous improvement of its effectiveness.
Leading applicant — The applicant in charge of: • interaction and active communication with all participating applicants and communication with the leading IM concerning general matters for each request, including changes in the requests, request withdrawal • acting as an information turntable for involved applicants • monitoring of compliance with the agreed timetabling process, detection of pressure points in the timetabling process and estimate of results. • initiating all possible steps to ensure compliance with the deadlines in case that pressure points are detected (investigation of the situation, active communication with the participating companies, e.g. sending a reminder) • execution of relevant tasks in PCS to promote dossiers to the correct phase on time
Leading engine — The engine in which a driving cab is used to control the movement of a train/shunting consist, under the supervision of the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment associated with the driving cab.
Leading IM — The IM in charge of: • interaction and active communication with all participating/involved IMs and communication with the leading applicant concerning general matters for each request • acting as an information turntable for involved IMs • monitoring of compliance with the agreed timetabling process, detection of pressure points in the timetabling process and estimation of results • initiating all possible steps to ensure compliance with the deadlines and to provide a harmonised offer in case that pressure points are detected (investigation of the situation, active communication with the participating companies, e.g. sending a reminder) • execution of relevant tasks in PCS to promote dossiers to the correct phase on time
Leak frequency — Rate with which a leak, corresponding to a given leak definition, occurs.
Leak from gas pipe — This critical event is a hole with a diameter corresponding to a given percentage of the nominal diameter of the pipe. It can also be a leak from a functional opening on the pipe: flanged joints, pump seals, valves, plugs, seals, … This leak occurs on a pipe carrying a gaseous substance. This critical event includes also a leak on equipment where a solid material is in suspension in air or in gas.
Leak from liquid pipe — This critical event is a hole with a diameter corresponding to a given percentage of the nominal diameter of the pipe. It can also be a leak from a functional opening on the pipe: flanged joints, pump seals, valves, plugs, seals, … This leak occurs on a pipe carrying a liquid substance.
Leakproofness test — A test to determine the leakproofness of a tank, a packaging or an IBC and of the equipment and closure devices. NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7.
Learning outcomes — Statements regarding what a learner knows, understands and is able to do on completion of a learning process, which are defined in terms of knowledge, skills and responsibility and autonomy
Leg — One of the sections in case of a journey that requires the use of more than one train
Legal base/basis — A law based on an article in the Treaty giving competence to the European Union for a specific policy area and setting out the conditions for fulfilling that competence including budget implementation. Certain Treaty articles authorise the Commission to undertake certain actions, which imply spending, without there being a further legal act.
Legal commitment — An act whereby the authorising officer responsible enters into or establishes an obligation which results in subsequent payment or payments and the recognition of expenditure charged to the budget, and which includes specific agreements and contracts concluded under financial framework partnership agreements and framework contracts.
Length  of  the  non-stopping  area — The  length  where  is  forbidden  to  stop  the  vehicle,  value provided  in  meters
Length of section of line — Length between operational points at start and end of section of line.
Length of train — Total length of all vehicles over buffers including locomotive(s)
Length of tunnel — Length  of  a  tunnel  in  metres  from  entrance portal to exit portal.
Leonardo da Vinci — Action programme for the implementation of a vocational training policy
Letter of Intent (LoI) — A letter of intent (LOI or LoI, and sometimes capitalized as Letter of Intent in legal writing, but only when referring to a specific document under discussion) is a document outlining one or more agreements between two or more parties before the agreements are finalized. The concept is similar to a heads of agreement, term sheet or memorandum of understanding. Such outlined agreements may be mergers and acquisitions transaction agreements,[1] joint venture agreements, real property lease agreements and several other categories of agreements that may govern material transactions.
LEU — Line side Electronic Unit
LEU — Line Electronic Unit
LEVEL — Contracted form of APPLICATION LEVEL
LEVEL 0 — A level of ERTMS/ETCS defined to cover instances when the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment is operating in an area where the trackside is neither fitted with operational ERTMS/ETCS equipment nor fitted with operational National System
LEVEL 0 AREA — Trackside area in which level 0 operation is supported.
LEVEL 1 — A level of ERTMS/ETCS overlaid onto conventional line side signalling that uses Eurobalises / Euroloop / Radio Infill to pass movement authorities to the train whilst relying on conventional means to determine train position and integrity.
LEVEL 1 AREA — Trackside area in which level 1 operation is supported.
LEVEL 2 — A level of ERTMS/ETCS that uses radio to pass movement authorities to the train. Train reported position and integrity may be used to determine the parts of the track that are occupied by the train.
LEVEL 2 AREA — Trackside area in which level 2 operation is supported.
Level access — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. A level access is an access from a platform to the doorway of a rolling stock for which it can be demonstrated that: - The gap between the door sill of that doorway (or of the extended bridging plate of that doorway) and the platform does not exceed 75 mm measured horizontally and 50 mm measured vertically and - The rolling stock has no internal step between the door sill and the vestibule.
Level crossing — An intersection at the same elevation of a road and one or more rail tracks
Level crossing — Any level intersection between a road or passage and a railway, as recognised by the infrastructure manager and open to public or private users. Passages between platforms within stations are excluded, as well as passages over tracks for the sole use of employees.
Level crossing — Any level intersection between a road and a railway, as authorized by the infrastructure manager and open to public or private road users. Passages between platforms within stations are excluded.
Level crossing — Any level intersection between a road and a railway, as authorised by the infrastructure manager and open to public or private road users. Passages between platforms within stations are excluded, as well as passages over tracks for the sole use of employees. Sometimes also referred to as grade crossing.
Level crossing accident — Any accident at level crossings involving at least one railway vehicle and one or more crossing vehicles, other crossing users such as pedestrians or other objects temporarily present on or near the track if lost by a crossing vehicle or user.
Level crossing accidents — Any accident at level crossings involving at least one railway vehicle and one or more crossing vehicles, other users of the road such as pedestrians or other objects temporarily present at or near the track. Level crossing: Any level intersection between a road and a railway, as authorized by the infrastructure manager and open to public or private road users. Passages between platforms within stations are excluded. Road: For the purpose of Rail Accidents Statistics, any public or private road, street or highway, including footpaths and bicycle lane
Level crossing accidents — Any accident at level crossings involving at least one railway vehicle and one or more crossing vehicles, other users of the road such as pedestrians or other objects temporarily present at or near the track. Sometimes also referred to as grade crossing accident.
Level crossing functionality — Requirements for the set of specifications No 1 in Table A2 of the Annex A to the CCS TSI laid down in Decision 2012/88/EU related to the level crossing functionality for ETCS on-board.
Level crossing user — Any person using a level crossing to cross the railway line by any means of transport or by foot.
Level crossing users — All persons using a level crossing to cross the railway line by any means of transportation or by foot.
LEVEL NTC — A level of ERTMS/ETCS that allows the supervision of the train with an existing National Train Control system.
LEVEL NTC AREA — Trackside area in which level NTC operation is supported.
Level of confidence of a safety barrier: — The probability of failure on demand to perform properly a required safety function according to a given effectiveness and response time under all the stated conditions within a stated period of time. This notion is similar to the notion of SIL (Safety Integrity Level) defined in IEC 61511 for Safety Instrumented Systems but applies here to all types of safety barriers. The "design" level of confidence is assessed with the help of instruction given in Appendix 8 of the IEC standard. The barrier is assumed to be maintained so that it is as efficient as when it was installed, to have the same response time and the same level of confidence or probability of failure on demand. The "operational" level of confidence includes the influence of the safety management system. The value could be lower than the "design" one if some problems are identified during the audit of the safety management system.
Level of error (and residual error rate) — The best estimation by the authorising officer, taking into account all relevant information available and using professional judgement, of the expenditure or revenue found to be in breach of applicable regulatory and contractual provisions at the time the financial operations  were authorised. The level of error is measured at various moments in time: • At the time of payment, when no corrective measures have been yet implemented; • At the time of reporting, when some corrective measures have been implemented but others will be implemented in successive years • At the time of closure, when all corrective measures will have been implemented.
Level transition announcement — A Level Transition Announcement means both a level transition ordered for a further location and a level transition ordered at null distance transmitted as in-fill information
Level transition border — A location where the list of levels supported by the trackside changes.
Level transition information — This term is used for both Level Transition Order and Conditional Level Transition Order.
Level transition order — This term is used for both Immediate Level Transition Order and Level Transition Announcement.
Levels of maintenance — Maintenance may be divided in 5 levels: •	The first level includes the actions of checking (including technical inspections) and monitoring undertaken before the departure (pre-departure) or on route. This level is regulated in TSI OPE and is not on the responsibility of ECMs. •	The second level includes inspections, checks, tests, fast exchanges of replaceable units and preventative and corrective operations of limited duration between two scheduled journeys. •	The third level corresponds to the operations carried out mainly in specialised facilities of a maintenance centre. It includes interventions of preventative and corrective maintenance and scheduled exchanges of components. The vehicle is not in active service during this level of maintenance. •	The fourth level comprises the major maintenance operations, generally called overhauls (of modular subsystems or of the complete vehicle).  •	The fifth level comprises the refurbishment, modifications, very heavy repairs, renewal or upgrading, except where they are the subject to new authorisation under the interoperability Directives.  The levels of maintenance are usually combined and grouped as following: •	Light maintenance Also called line maintenance. Represents all measures carried out on the complete vehicle subsystem and replacement works (including related measurements and testing).  Light maintenance may include level 2 and level 3. •	Heavy maintenance Also called base maintenance (including renovation). Represents all measures, undertaken to establish the actual condition and/or to reinstate the nominal condition, that necessitate partially or completely disassembling of the vehicle (including related measurements and the associated measuring and testing). It represents also all measures to recondition components or spare parts. Heavy maintenance may include level 4 and level 5.
Levening — The noise indicator for annoyance during the evening period, as further defined in Annex I.
Leverage effect — The amount of reimbursable financing provided to eligible final recipients divided by the amount of the Union contribution.
LI — Liechtenstein
LIBOR — London interbank offered rate
Licence — An authorisation issued by the competent authority of a Contracting Party to an undertaking, by which its capacity as a railway undertaking is recognised. That capacity may be limited to the operation of specific types of transport services.
Licence — An authorisation issued by a licensing authority to an undertaking, by which its capacity to provide rail transport services as a railway undertaking is recognised; that capacity may be limited to the provision of specific types of services.
Licence — The authorisation issued by a State to a Railway Undertaking, in accordance with the laws and prescriptions in force in that State, by which its capacity asa carrier is recognised.
Licence — DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU (Recast): 'an authorisation issued by a licensing authority to an undertaking, by which its capacity to provide rail transport services as a railway undertaking is recognised; that capacity may be limited to the provision of specific types of services' OTIF definition: 'the authorisation issued by a State to a railway undertaking, in accordance with the laws and prescriptions in force in that State, by which its capacity as a carrier is recognized.' General definition: document issued by the relevant authority which allows a railway operator to use the rail infrastructure.
Licensing authority — The body charged by each Contracting Party with the issue of licences.
Licensing authority — The body responsible for granting licences within a Member State.
Licross — League of Red Cross Societies
LIFE — Financial instrument for the environment
Life cycle cost (LCC) — Sum of the costs generated during the life cycle of the item. Note 1 to entry: For a user or an owner of an item, the total life cycle cost may include only those costs pertaining to acquisition, operation, maintenance (3.1.2.12) and disposal.
Life cycle costing — Process of evaluating the difference between the life cycle cost (3.1.2.10) of two or more alternative options. Note 1 to entry: Life cycle costing can involve quantitative and/or qualitative assessment.
Lifecycle (System) — The activities occurring during a period of time that starts when a system is conceived and ends at decommissioning when the system is no longer available for use. (See Reference 3)
Lifecycle cost (System) — The sum of the costs sustained or to be sustained for performing and appropriately supporting the activities occurring in the context of the operational parts of the System Lifecycle.
LIFT-ON-LIFT-OFF (LO-LO): — Loading and unloading of intermodal transport units (ITU, see 4.1) using lifting equipment.
Lifting and jacking — Special requirements to the vehicle design for lifting, jacking and re-railing, capacity of the vehicle body to resist lasting deformations, also geometry and location of the lifting points. Not included is the lifting and re-railing instruction; therefor see chapter 1.
Light rail — An urban and/or suburban rail transport system with a crashworthiness of C-III or C-IV (in accordance with EN 15227:2011) and a maximum strength of vehicle of 800 kN (longitudinal compressive force  in coupling area); light rail systems may have their own right of way or share it with road traffic  and usually do not exchange vehicles with long-distance passenger or freight traffic.
Light rail — An urban and/or suburban rail transport system with a crashworthiness of C-III or C-IV (in accordance with EN 15227:2011) and a maximum strength of vehicle of 800 kN (longitudinal compressive force  in coupling area); light rail systems may have their own right of way or share it with road traffic and usually do not exchange vehicles with long-distance passenger or freight traffic.
Light rail — It is a rail line, often electrified, and mainly for the urban transport of passengers. Stations/halts are generally less than 1 200 m apart. In comparison to metros, light rail is more lightly constructed, is designed for lower traffic volumes and usually travels at lower speeds. Normally, the power is drawn from an overhead electric line via a device that maintains electrical contact (a trolley or a pantograph). It is sometimes difficult to make a precise distinction between light rail and trams; trams are generally not separated from road traffic but light rail may be separated from other systems.
Light rail — A railway for the transport of passengers that often uses electrically powered rail-borne cars operating singly or in short trains on fixed duo-rail lines. There is generally a distance of less than 1 200 m between stations/stops. In comparison to metros, light rail is more lightly constructed, is designed for lower traffic volumes and usually travels at lower speeds. It is sometimes difficult to make a precise distinction between light rail and trams; trams are generally not separated from road traffic, whereas light rail may be separated from other systems.
Light rail vehicle — It is a rail vehicle designed for use on a light rail line.
Light rail vehicle — Rail vehicle designed for use on a light rail line.
Light railway/rail line — A rail line mainly for urban and interurban transport of passengers often electrified characterised by lower travel speed and more frequent stops compared to a conventional railway line. In comparison to metros, light rail is more lightly constructed, is designed for lower traffic volumes and usually travels at lower speeds. Normally the power is drawn from an overhead electric line via a trolley or a pantograph. It is sometimes difficult to make a precise distinction between light rail and trams; trams are generally not separated from road traffic, whereas light rail may be separated from other systems. Urban light railway lines are excluded from tracks and lines
Light-gauge metal packaging — A packaging of circular, elliptical, rectangular or polygonal crosssection (also conical) and taper-necked and pail-shaped packaging made of metal, having a wall thickness of less than 0.5 mm (e.g. tinplate), flat or convex bottomed and with one or more orifices, which is not covered by the definitions for drums or jerricans.
Lighting in driver's cab — E.g. luminosity of lighting, independent lighting of the driver's desk reading zone, lighting control, adjustability of luminosity of lighting, allowed light colour.
Limit of authority — The place beyond which the train has no information but to which the train is authorised to run with a defined target speed higher than zero. The train is expected to receive new information before passing the Limit of Authority.
Limit of liability — The maximum sum of money payable by a carrier to a shipper for any damage or loss to the cargo for which the carrier is liable under the contract of carriage. The amount of the limitation is determined by agreement or by law.
Limit of maximum longitudinal positive and negative acceleration — Limit of acceleration due to maximum admissible longitudinal forces in the track.
Limit of wheel rail adhesion profile — Requirements concerning the limitation of the wheel-rail adhesion profile, e.g. target design friction coefficients to limit the exploitation of wheel rail adhesion for wheel slide protection, vehicle configurations to be considered, wheel diameter and load conditions to be considered.
Limit value — A value of Lden or Lnight, and where appro[1]priate Lday and Levening, as determined by the Member State, the exceeding of which causes competent authorities to consider or enforce mitigation measures; limit values may be different for different types of noise (road-, rail-, air-traffic noise, industrial noise, etc.), different surroundings and different noise sensitiveness of the populations; they may also be different for existing situations and for new situations (where there is a change in the situation regarding the noise source or the use of the surrounding).
Limited supervision mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode giving partial protection against over speed and over run. The driver has to observe and obey to line side signals and operating rules when in limited supervision mode.
Limits for aerodynamic loads impact — Aerodynamic load impact, e.g. on people on platforms and on the open line.
Limits for noise emissions — Parameter without explanation in the document
Line — A continuous section of railway track.
Line classification / line designation — Lines are classified into various categories according to a number of technical factors.
Line gradient — The rate at which a railway track rises or falls in relation to the horizontal. This is expressed by a percentage number (for instance, 1 unit of vertical change for a section that is 200 units long is 5‰, or 5 per 1000).
Line km — The length measured in kilometres of the railway network in Member States, whose scope is laid down in Article 2. For multiple-track railway lines, only the distance between origin and destination is to be counted.
Line side electronic unit — A device for communicating variable signalling data to switchable balises.
Line side equipment — See Trackside Equipment.
Line speed — Maximum speed for which a line has been designed.
Line speed — Maximum speed measured in kilometres per hour for which a line has been designed
Line speed — The maximum general speed permitted for a railway line, for example 100 km/h. This may be subject to localised speed restrictions.
Liner — A tube or bag inserted into a packaging, including large packagings or IBCs, but not forming an integral part of it, including the closures of its openings.
Lines — In railway, they are one or more adjacent running tracks forming a route between two points. Where a section of network comprises two or more lines running alongside one another, there are as many lines as routes to which tracks are allotted exclusively. A running track is a track providing end-to-end line continuity designed for trains between stations or places indicated in tariffs as independent points of departure or arrival for the conveyance of passengers or goods.
Lineside indications of distance (frequency, appearance and positioning) — [NNNN]  frequency  in  meters Appearance  –  selectable  list [L/R] – the side along  the track where the lineside indication is  positioned  (left  or  right)
Linked service facilities — Service facilities which are adjacent to one another and require passage through one to reach the other.
Linked travel arrangement — At least two different types of travel services purchased for the purpose of the same trip or holiday, not constituting a package, resulting in the conclusion of separate contracts with the individual travel service providers, if a trader facilitates: (a) on the occasion of a single visit or contact with his point of sale, the separate selection and separate payment of each travel service by travellers; or (b)in a targeted manner, the procurement of at least one additional travel service from another trader where a contract with such other trader is concluded at the latest 24 hours after the confirmation of the booking of the first travel service. Where not more than one type of travel service as referred to in point (a), (b) or (c) of point 1 and one or more tourist services as referred to in point (d) of point 1 are purchased, they do not constitute a linked travel arrangement if the latter services do not account for a significant proportion of the combined value of the services and are not advertised as, and do not otherwise represent, an essential feature of the trip or holiday.
Linking — A functionality to protect against missing data from BALISE GROUPS by announcing them in advance through LINKING INFORMATION and by checking whether they have been read within a certain EXPECTATION WINDOW
Linking distance — The distance between announced balise groups.
Linking information — Data defining the distance between groups of balises, their identity and orientation, and the action to be taken if an announced balise group is not detected within given limits (EXPECTATION WINDOW).
Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) — A refrigerated liquefied gas composed of natural gas with a high methane content assigned to UN No. 1972.
Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) — A low pressure liquefied gas composed of one or more light hydrocarbons which are assigned to UN Nos. 1011, 1075, 1965, 1969 or 1978 only and which consists mainly of propane, propene, butane, butane isomers, butene with traces of other hydrocarbon gases. NOTE 1: Flammable gases assigned to other UN numbers shall not be regarded as LPG. NOTE 2: For UN No. 1075 see NOTE 2 under 2F, UN No. 1965, in the table for liquefied gases in 2.2.2.3.
Liquid — A substance which at 50 °C has a vapour pressure of not more than 300 kPa (3 bar), which is not completely gaseous at 20 °C and 101.3 kPa, and which (a) has a melting point or initial melting point of 20 °C or less at a pressure of 101.3 kPa, or (b) is liquid according to the ASTM D 4359-90 test method or (c) is not pasty according to the criteria applicable to the test for determining fluidity (penetrometer test) described in 2.3.4. NOTE: "Carriage in the liquid state", for the purpose of tank requirements, means: – Carriage of liquids according to the above definition, or – Solids handed over for carriage in the molten state.
Liquid biofuels — It includes all liquid fuels of natural origin (e.g. produced from biomass and/or the biodegradable fraction of waste), suitable to be blended with or replace liquid fuels from fossil origin. In energy statistics, liquid biofuels is a product aggregate equal to the sum of biogasoline, biodiesels, bio jet kerosene and other liquid biofuels.
Liquidity risk — The risk that a financial asset held in the common provisioning fund might not be sold during a certain period of time without incurring a significant loss.
Liquified methane — LNG, liquefied biogas or synthetic liquefied methane, including blends of those fuels.
List of vehicles already identified as compatible with Traffic load and load carrying capacity of infrastructure and train detection systems — The  infrastructure  managers  shall  provide  through  RINF  the information   or   a   document   to   the   RU   regarding   list   of vehicle(s)  compatible  with  the  route  for  which  they  have already   verified   compatibility   for   parameter   ‘Traffic   load and    load    carrying   capacity   of   infrastructure   and    train detection  systems’,  where  such  information  is  available.
Litigation file — A file maintained by a reservation system where the RS registers any anomaly encountered during operation
LK — Sri Lanka
LLRU — Lowest line replaceable unit
LME — London Metal Exchange
LNG — Liquefied Natural Gas
Lnight — The noise indicator for sleep disturbance, as further defined in Annex I.
LOA — Limit of Authority
Load capability — Parameter without explanation in the document
Load capability — A  combination  of  the  line  category  and speed at the weakest point of the track
Load capacity — It is in the road freight transport the maximum weight of goods declared permissible by the competent authority of the country of registration of the vehicle.
Load conditions and weighed mass — Load conditions and weighed mass are mainly an operational issue (referring to the line class). The parameter refers to the understanding of the mass system, to ensure that the same understanding of the mass and load calculations are given. The load capability is an operational matter however maximum load condition shall be consistent with the design of the vehicle (strength of the structure).
Loader — Any enterprise which: (a) Loads packaged dangerous goods, small containers or portable tanks into or onto a wagon or a container; or (b) Loads a container, bulk-container, MEGC, tank-container, portable tank or road vehicle onto a wagon.
Loader — An enterprise which loads packaged goods, small containers or portable tanks into or onto a wagon or a container, or which loads a container, bulk-container, multiple-element gas container, tank-container or  portable tank onto a wagon.
Loading — All actions carried out by the loader, in accordance with the definition of loader.
Loading gauge — Maximum physical dimensions (height and width) to which an open rail wagon can be loaded.
Loading track — Track on which ITUs are transshipped.
Loading unit — Container, swap body. ‘Flats’ (see G.II-09 below used in maritime transport) are included as a special type of container.
Loading unit — Container or swap body
Loading unit / Unloading unit — Unit used for inlet and outlet of substances in the establishment, involving transport equipment.
Loan — An agreement which obliges the lender to make available to the borrower an agreed amount of money for an agreed period and under which the borrower is obliged to repay that amount within the agreed period.
LOC&PAS — Locomotive and Passenger Rolling Stock (TSI)
Local Informatics Security Officer (LISO) — The officer who is responsible for IT security liaison for a Commission department.
Local time — The time for ordinary transactions in a locality, which is likely to be shown on station clocks.
Location and orientation — Relative position to the line identified under parameter 1.1.0.0.0.2, given in km and indication if the signal refers to normal or opposite track direction.
Location and orientation — Relative position to the national line, given in km and indication if the signal refers to normal or opposite track direction.
Location item — Classification of an individual location based information (i.e. the location of Location data or one of the locations of Profile data) as "estimated", "min" or "max" location item. An individual location based information may be classified as one, two or three location items.
Location of evacuation and rescue  points — Value provided in Kilometric point of the start of the point of evacuation  and  rescue  point  and  the  length  in  m.  Repeatable values  for  each  location
Location of walkways — Value   provided   in   Kilometric   point   of   the   start   of   the walkway  and  the  length  in  m.  Repeatable  values  for  each location
Location Point (LP) — Any specific point on a track of a SoL where value of a parameter changes.
Loco ID — The unique identification number of a traction unit
Locomotive — Traction vehicle (or combination of several vehicles) that is not intended to carry a payload and has the ability to be uncoupled in normal operation from a train and to operate independently.
Locomotive — A tractive vehicle used for hauling railway vehicles but not intended to carry a payload and has the ability to be uncoupled in normal operation. Types of locomotives: •	Electric locomotive: Locomotive with one or more electric motors, deriving current primarily from overhead wires or conductor rails or from accumulators carried on the locomotive. A locomotive so equipped which also has an engine (diesel or other) to supply current to the electric motor when it cannot be obtained from an overhead wire or from a conductor rail is classed as an electric locomotive. •	Diesel locomotive: Locomotive, the main source of power of which is a diesel engine, irrespective of the type of transmission installed. However, electro-diesel locomotives which are equipped to derive power from an overhead wire or from a conductor rail but are also equipped with a diesel engine (bi-mode-locomotives) are classed as electric locomotives. Diesel-electric locomotives which are propelled by electric motors and derive energy from a diesel generator are classed as diesel locomotives. •	Steam locomotive: Locomotive, whether cylinder or turbine driven, in which the source of power is steam irrespective of the type of fuel used.
Locomotive — Self-propelled railway vehicle, or combination of self-propelled railway vehicles, for pushing and/or pulling other railway vehicle(s), that is not intended to carry payload and has the ability to be coupled/uncoupled in normal operation.
Logistic Centre /Freight village — Geographical grouping of independent companies and bodies which are dealing with freight transport (for example, freight forwarders, shippers, transport operators, customs) and with accompanying services (for example, storage, maintenance and repair), including at least a terminal. In English, also called “Freight village”. In Italian, also called “Interporto”.
Logistics — The process of designing and managing the supply chain in the wider sense. The chain can extend from the delivery of supplies for manufacturing, through the management of materials at the plant, delivery to warehouses and distribution centres, sorting, handling, packaging and final distribution to point of consumption.
Long-distance rail passenger service — A rail passenger service which is not an urban, a suburban or a regional rail passenger service.
Loop — Track, connected to the main track, used for passing, crossing and stabling.
Loop — Track mounted device for the transmission of data between track- to-train within a defined area.
Loop message format — The format for transmitting data by a loop.
Loop transmission module — A module (inside the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment), which retrieves application data from a loop.
Lorry — It is a rigid road motor vehicle designed, exclusively or primarily, to carry goods.
Loss of containment — Abnormal release of a dangerous substance from its containment to the environment. Equivalent to “Release”.
Low floor wagon — A rail wagon with a low loading platform built to carry, inter alia, ITUs (see 4.1).
Low value grant — A grant lower than or equal to EUR 60 000
LPG — Liquefied Petroleum Gas
LPG — Liquefied petroleum gas
LR — Liberia
LRBG — Last Relevant Balise Group
LRU — Lead Railway Undertaking
LS — Limited Supervision mode
LS — Sound pressure level measured as LAFmax the maximum Sound Level with ‘A’ Frequency weighting and Fast Time weighting during the measurement period.
LS — Lesotho
LS — Limited Supervision
LSmax — maximum LAFmax
LSmin — Minimum LAFmax
LSSMA — Lowest Supervised Speed within the Movement Authority
LT — Lithuania
lt — Lithuanian
LTM — Loop Transmission Module
LU — Luxembourg
LUC — Line Under Construction
Luminance contrast k — Luminance of the contrast colour, L1, divided by the luminance of the safety colour, L2, where L1 is greater than L2. k = L1 / L2
Luminance factor β — Ratio of the luminance of the surface element in a given direction to that of a perfect reflecting or transmitting diffuser identically illuminated.
LV — Latvia
lv — Latvian
LX — Level crossing
LY — Libya
m — Metre
m — Mass to be braked per wheel for design mass (including rotating mass) in conformity with EN 15663
m1 — Mass m in working order
m1W — Mass m in working order divided by the number of wheels
m2 — Square metre
m2 — Mass m under normal payload
MA — Movement Authority
MA — Morocco
MAC — Message Authentication Code
Machine-readable format — A machine-readable format as defined in Article 2, point (13), of Directive. (EU) 2019/1024
Maglev system — Non-conventional railway system in which vehicle is lifted, guided and propelled using magnetic attraction or repulsion.
Magnetic track brake — Requirements on magnetic track brakes, e.g. allowed operation cases, geometrical characteristics of the magnet elements, way of mounting (high/low hanging).
Main establishment — (a) as regards a controller with establishments in more than one Member State, the place of its central administration in the Union, unless the decisions on the purposes and means of the processing of personal data are taken in another establishment of the controller in the Union and the latter establishment has the power to have such decisions implemented, in which case the establishment having taken such decisions is to be considered to be the main establishment; (b) a s regards a processor with establishments in more than one Member State, the place of its central administration in the Union, or, if the processor has no central administration in the Union, the establishment of the processor in the Union where the main processing activities in the context of the activities of an establishment of the processor take place to the extent that the processor is subject to specific obligations under this Regulation.
Main line railway system — Railway system intended for intra- and interregional and/or international transport services.
Main ports — According to the Directive 2009/42/EC they are ports handling more than 1 million tonnes of goods or 200 000 passengers annually. More data are to be collected for “main ports” than for other ports. However, the additional data may also be included by countries for smaller ports on a voluntary basis. Moreover, because of normal fluctuations in port activity, the thresholds are not automatically applied on a yearly basis to maintain the consistency of the series over time.
Main signal — A fixed signal intended for train movements capable of showing a ‘danger aspect’ and one or more ‘proceed aspects’. In some cases main signals at danger are valid for shunt movements.
Main/running track — A track providing end-to-end line continuity designed for running trains between stations or places indicated in timetables, network statements, rosters or other indications/publications as independent points of departure or arrival for the conveyance of passengers or goods.
Maintainability — The probability that a given active maintenance action, for an item under given conditions of use can be carried out within a stated time interval when the maintenance is performed under stated conditions and using stated procedures and resources. (3) (Definitions for other maintenance related terms are given in reference 3).
Maintainability — Ability of an item under given conditions of use, to be retained in, or restored to, a state in which it can perform a required function, when maintenance (3.1.2.12) is performed under given conditions and using stated procedures and resources. Note 1 to entry: Given conditions include aspects that affect maintainability, such as: location for maintenance  (3.1.2.12), accessibility, maintenance procedures and maintenance resources.
Maintained safety sign — Sign in which the integral lamps are energized at all times when normal or emergency mode of operation is required.
Maintenance — The procedures, associated equipment, logistics centres for maintenance work and reserves providing the mandatory corrective and preventive maintenance to ensure the interoperability of the Union rail system and guarantee the performance required.
Maintenance — Works intended to maintain the condition and capability of existing infrastructure in a way that it provides a level of service suited to the traffic flow and a high level of safety during its lifetime.
Maintenance — Combination of all technical and management actions intended to retain an item in, or restore it to a state in which it can perform as required. Note 1 to entry: Management is assumed to include supervision activities.
Maintenance activities — A structured approach to ensure: -    that all maintenance activities affecting safety and safety-critical components are identified and correctly managed and that all the necessary changes to those maintenance activities affecting safety are identified, properly managed based upon the return of experience and the application of Common Safety Methods for risk assessment in accordance with point (a) of Article 6(1) and properly documented; -    conformity with the essential requirements for interoperability; -    the implementation and check of maintenance facilities, equipment and tools specifically developed and required for maintenance delivery; -    the analysis of the initial documentation related to the vehicle for providing the first maintenance file and to ensure its correct implementation through the development of maintenance orders; -    that components (including spare parts) and materials are used as specified in the maintenance orders and supplier documentation; they are stored, handled and transported in an appropriate manner as specified in the maintenance orders and supplier documentation and comply with relevant national and international rules as well as with the requirements of relevant maintenance orders.
Maintenance expenditure on railways infrastructure — Non-capital expenditure to maintain the original condition and capacity of the existing railway infrastructure.
Maintenance expenditure on rolling stock — Non-capital expenditure to maintain railway vehicles in working order without improving either their performance or their capacity.
Maintenance file — Elements of the technical file relating to conditions and limits of use and instructions for maintenance.
Maintenance File — The document(s) that specify the inspections and maintenance tasks to be carried out on a vehicle, which is set up according to the rules and provisions in the UTP including specific cases and notified national technical requirements in force, if any, according to Article 12 of the APTU Uniform Rules. The Maintenance File includes the Maintenance Record File as defined in Article 2 - p).
Maintenance instructions — Maintenance manuals and leaflets, including requirements necessary to maintain design safety level of the vehicle. Any appropriate professional qualifications, i.e. skills that are requested for equipment maintenance.
Maintenance instructions and requirements — Parameter without explanation in the document
Maintenance of the railway infrastructure — Works intended to maintain the condition and capability of existing infrastructure.
Maintenance plan — A series of documents setting out the infrastructure maintenance procedures adopted by an Infrastructure Manager.
Maintenance plan — A series of documents setting out the infrastructure maintenance procedures adopted by an infrastructure manager
Maintenance Record File — The documentation relating to an admitted vehicle, which contains the record of its operating history and the inspections and maintenance operations that have been carried out on it.
Maintenance rules — Is a set of activities intended to keep a functional unit in, or to restore it to a state in which it can perform its required function.
Maintenance system — A Maintenance system is defined as a formalised system that documents processes, procedures,  and responsibilities for achieving the maintenance policies and objectives. A maintenance system helps to assure that the organisation’s activities related to the maintenance of railway vehicles meet customer and regulatory requirements and to improve its effectiveness and efficiency on continuous basis.
Maintenance workshop — A mobile or fixed entity composed of staff, including those with management responsibility, tools and facilities organised to deliver maintenance on vehicles, parts, components or sub-assemblies of vehicles.
Maintenance workshop — A mobile or fixed entity composed of staff, including those with management responsibility, tools and facilities organised to deliver maintenance on vehicles, parts, components or sub-assemblies of vehicles
Maintenance, heavy maintenance — Activity aiming to maintain something in good working order, prevent operational disturbance and/or uphold a given technical standard. EU definition (DIRECTIVE 2016/797/EU): 'The procedures, associated equipment, logistics centres for maintenance work and reserves allowing the mandatory corrective and preventive maintenance to ensure the interoperability of the rail system and guarantee the performance required.'  EU definition (DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU, recast) of 'heavy maintenance': 'means work that is not carried out routinely as part of day-to-day operations and requires the vehicle to be removed from service.'
MAIS — Maximum Abbreviated Injury Scale
Major airport — A civil airport, designated by the Member State, which has more than 50 000 movements per year (a movement being a take-off or a landing), excluding those purely for training purposes on light aircraft.
Major events - right side — In Bow-tie Terminology: Significant effects caused by the dangerous phenomena on vulnerable objects (human beings, structure, environment, …).
Major railway — A railway, designated by the Member State, which has more than 30 000 train passages per year.
Major road — A regional, national or international road, designated by the Member State, which has more than three million vehicle passages a year.
Make available — The publishing of information or data where access control may be applied
Making available on the market — Any supply of a product for distribution, consumption or use on the Community market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge.
Making available on the market — Any supply of radio equipment for distribution, consumption or use on the Union market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge.
Malfunction — A deviation from the specified performance causing the system to work incorrectly. This is normally due to an error or fault in the system.
Managed security service provider — A managed service provider that carries out or provides assistance for activities relating to cybersecurity risk management.
Managed service provider — An entity that provides services related to the installation, management, operation or maintenance of ICT products, networks, infrastructure, applications or any other network and information systems, via assistance or active administration carried out either on customers’ premises or remotely.
Management board — The senior body of an undertaking performing executive and administrative functions, which is responsible and accountable for day-to-day management of the undertaking.
Management Board (MB, MaBo) — Representative of the IM’s and AB’s of the corridor, part of the governance structure of an RFC.
Management system — Either the safety management systems of railway undertakings and infrastructure managers, as defined in Article 3(i) of Directive 2004/49/EC and complying with requirements laid down in Article 9 and Annex III of that Directive, or the system of maintenance of entities in charge of maintenance complying with requirements laid down in Article 14a(3) of that Directive.
Management system — For the carriage of radioactive material, means a set of interrelated or interacting elements (system) for establishing policies and objectives and enabling the objectives to be achieved in an efficient and effective manner.
Management system — A set of interrelated or interacting elements of an organisation to establish policies and objectives, and the processes to achieve those objectives (ISO 9000).
Manager — The person who makes railway infrastructure available and who has responsibilities in accordance with laws and prescriptions in force in the state in which the infrastrucrture is located.
Mandate — Instructions for procuring risk estimations corresponding to a risk situation broadly described by a decision-maker.
Mandatory — When it is compulsory to fulfil and to implement a requirement to realise a technically interoperable standard for the ERTMS/ETCS equipment or system.
Mandatory action sign — Safety sign that indicates that a specific course of action is to be taken.
Manifest on list — A fulfilment method where the customer makes its purchase in advance (e.g. at home) and receives only a confirmation, usually with a reference code. The undertaking performing this kind of sale provides the TCO with a list of all passengers (and reference codes) admitted on the specific train. The passenger simply manifests his/her desire to be admitted on the train before/after departure at the TCO. TCO checks whether the passenger is allowed to embark/stay on the train
Manifest on List — A fulfilment method where the customer makes its purchase in advance (e.g. at home) and receives only a confirmation, usually with a reference code. The undertaking performing this kind of sale provides the TCO with a list of all passengers (and reference codes) admitted on the specific train. The passenger simply manifests his/her desire to be admitted on the train before/after departure at the TCO. TCO checks whether the passenger is allowed to embark/stay on the train
Manual level change — Level transition initiated by the driver.
Manual of Tests and Criteria — The eighth revised edition of the United Nations publication bearing this title (ST/SG/AC.10/11/Rev.8
Manufacturer — Any natural or legal person who manufactures a product or has a product designed or manufactured, and markets that product under his name or trademark.
Manufacturer — Any  natural  or  legal  person  who  manufactures  a  product  in  the  form  of  interoperability constituents, subsystems or vehicles, or has it designed or manufactured, and markets it under his name or trademark.
Manufacturer — The manufacturer as defined in point (36) of Article 2 of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Manufacturer — Any natural or legal person who manufactures radio equipment or has radio equipment designed or manufactured, and markets that equipment under his name or trade mark.
Manufacturer — A ‘manufacturer’ as defined in Article 3, point (40), of Regulation (EU) 2018/858: (A natural or legal person who is responsible for all aspects of the type-approval of a vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit, or the individual vehicle approval, or the authorisation process for parts and equipment, for ensuring conformity of production and for market surveillance matters regarding that vehicle, system, component, separate technical unit, part and equipment produced, irrespective of whether or not that person is directly involved in all stages of the design and construction of that vehicle, system, component or separate technical unit concerned).
Marginal costs — Costs related to a small increment in demand (e.g. an extra vehicle-kilometre driven). Long term marginal costs include the capacity expansion needed to service increased traffic demands.
Maritime and inland port facilities — A location on a coast, lakeshore or inland waterway, where freight can be transferred from ship to land or vice versa. It includes: port areas, equipments or infrastructures normally used for, or in connection with, the provision of loading/unloading services for goods, cargo handling, handling of shipping traffic and facilities for ferryboat services. These facilities are mentioned in DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU, ANNEX II, 2. (g) as one of the SERVICES TO BE SUPPLIED TO THE RAILWAY UNDERTAKINGS but are not defined.
Maritime Container — A container strong enough to be stacked in a cellular ship and to be top lifted. Most maritime containers are ISO containers, i.e. they confirm to all relevant International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards.
Maritime port — ‘Maritime port’ as defined in Article 2, point (16), of Regulation (EU) 2017/352 of the European Parliament and of the Council (35).
Mark-up — The possibility of heightening the price in order to obtain a greater recovery of the costs incurred by the IM.
Marker lights — They are lights located at the front of train which have functionality to signal the front of a train. Several signal aspects for signalling the front of a train in different circumstances (e.g. train running on opposite track of the line, train in emergency situation, etc.) are possible.
Market price — See Global price
Marking and labelling in driver's cab — Requirements concerning signs, pictograms, labelling and statically displayed text for use of the driver inside the vehicle (cab, engine room, control cabinet). Which information has to be indicated in the driving cabs (usually Vmax, traction vehicle number, location of portable equipment, e.g. self-rescue device, signals, emergency exit). Use of harmonised pictograms.
Marshalling yard — Site especially equipped with a number of tracks or other equipment for railway vehicle marshalling (switching) operations. Sometimes also referred to as classification yard.
Marshalling yard — Eurostat/ITF/UNECE definition: Station or part of a station especially equipped with a number of tracks or other equipment for railway vehicle marshalling (switching) operations. [Sometimes referred to as classification yard.] General definition: railway facility equipped with tracks with special layout and technical facilities, where sorting, formation and splitting-up of trains takes place; wagons are sorted for a variety of destinations, using a number of rail tracks. There are 3 types of marshalling yards: flat-shunted yards, hump yards and gravity yards.  From a shunting point of view, both flat shunting and hump shunting may be in use; from the track position point of view, track can be parallel, continuous or mixed; from the point of view of technology: it can be automated (central switching, time and target braking), power operated (partial central switching, use of rail brake, drag shoes), or manually operated (local switching).                                                 Marshalling yards have the following four features: - lead track - automated switching - hump with entry and/or exit group - direction tracks.
Mass of package — Gross mass of the package unless otherwise stated.
Mass solid storage: storage of solid substances in the form of powder or pellets — These substances may be stored in bulk or in silos (solid products storage in form of "small" bags are not taken into account here).
Material — Single substance or uniformly dispersed mixture. EXAMPLE:Metal, stone, timber, concrete, mineral fibre and polymers.
Material set in motion (entrainment by a liquid) — This critical event is reserved for a potentially mobile solid exposed to the ambience (e.g., fragmented solid in an open storage or in conveyor belts) and occurs due to the presence of a liquid vector (e.g. flooding, liquid escaping from other equipment, …).
Material set in motion (entrainment by air) — This critical event is reserved for a potentially mobile solid, to a fragmented solid (powder, dust, ,..) exposed to the ambience (e.g., fragmented solid in an open storage or in conveyor belts) and occurs due to the presence of an air vector (e.g., too high ventilation, …).
Matthaeus — Exchange programme of customs officials
Max — Maximum
Max safe antenna position — The max safe antenna position differs from the max safe front end of the train by the distance between the active Eurobalise antenna and the end of the engine according to the train orientation plus, only in Supervised Manoeuvre mode, the max safe consist length in front of/in rear of the engine, depending on whether the train orientation is the same as/opposite to the active cab respectively
Max safe front end — The maximum safe front end position differs from the estimated position by the Under-reading Amount in the distance measured from the LRBG/ORBG plus the Location Accuracy of the LRBG/ORBG plus, when relevant, the difference between the max safe consist length and nominal consist length in front of/in rear of the engine, depending on whether the train orientation is the same as/opposite to the active cab respectively
Maximum altitude — Highest point of the section of  line above sea  level  in  reference  to  Normal  Amsterdam`s Peil (NAP).
Maximum authorized axle weight — The maximum weight for use in international traffic of a laden axle or group of axles.
Maximum authorized dimensions — The maximum dimensions for use of a vehicle, as laid down in Annex I to this Directive.
Maximum authorized weight — The maximum weight for use of a laden vehicle in international traffic.
Maximum braking distance requested — The maximum value of the braking  distance [in metres] of a train shall be given for the maximum line speed.
Maximum capacity — The maximum inner volume of receptacles or packagings including intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) and large packagings expressed in cubic metres or litres.
Maximum contact wire height — Indication of the maximum contact wire height expressed in metres.
Maximum current at standstill per pantograph — Indication   of   the   maximum allowable train  current  at  standstill  for  DC  systems expressed in amperes.
Maximum current at standstill per pantograph — Indication of the maximum allowable train current at standstill expressed  in  amperes.
Maximum currents — Parameter without explanation in the document
Maximum electro-magnetic fields — Magnetic field for human exposure outside rolling stock (e.g. human exposure limits).
Maximum electro-magnetic fields/Induced voltages — Parameter without explanation in the document
Maximum interference current — Maximum interference current limits allowed for track circuits for  a  defined  frequency  band.
Maximum magnetic field — The maximum magnetic field limits allowed for axle counters (in  dBμA/m) for a defined frequency  band. It  should  be  provided  in  3  directions
Maximum net mass — The maximum net mass of contents in a single packaging or maximum combined mass of inner packagings and the contents thereof expressed in kilograms.
Maximum normal operating pressure — For the carriage of radioactive material, means the maximum pressure above atmospheric pressure at mean sea-level that would develop in the containment system in a period of one year under the conditions of temperature and solar radiation corresponding to environmental conditions in the absence of venting, external cooling by an ancillary system, or operational controls during carriage.
Maximum operating speed — The highest speed allowed on commercial service taking into account technical characteristics of the infrastructure.
Maximum permissible gross mass — (a) (for IBCs) means the mass of the IBC and any service or structural equipment together with the maximum net mass; (b) (for tanks) means the tare of the tank and the heaviest load authorized for carriage. NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7
Maximum permissible laden weight (MPLW) — In road freight transport it is the total weight of the vehicle and of the load declared permissible by the competent authority of the country of registration of the vehicle.
Maximum permitted speed — Nominal  maximum  operational speed on the line as a result of infrastructure, energy and control, command and signalling subsystem characteristics expressed in kilometres/hour.
Maximum power and maximum train current that is permissible to draw from the overhead contact line — Including maximum current at standstill.
Maximum pressure variation in tunnels — Impact due to rapid changes in pressure by entering, running in or leaving tunnels.
Maximum speed for RV — Maximum speed given from the ETCS trackside in RV.
Maximum speed for RV — Maximum speed given from the trackside in RV.
Maximum speed for SR — Maximum speed given from the ETCS trackside in SR.
Maximum speed for SR — Maximum speed given from the trackside in SR.
Maximum train current — Indication of the maximum allowable train current expressed in amperes.
Maximum train deceleration — Limit for longitudinal track resistance given as a maximum allowed train  deceleration  and  expressed in metres per square second.
Maximum working pressure (gauge pressure) — The highest of the following three pressures that may occur at the top of the tank in the operating position: (a) the highest effective pressure allowed in the tank during filling (maximum filling pressure allowed); (b) the highest effective pressure allowed in the tank during discharge (maximum discharge pressure allowed); and (c) the effective gauge pressure to which the tank is subjected by its contents (including such extraneous gases as it may contain) at the maximum working temperature. Unless the special requirements prescribed in Chapter 4.3 provide otherwise, the numerical value of this working pressure (gauge pressure) shall not be lower than the vapour pressure (absolute pressure) of the filling substance at 50 °C. For tanks equipped with safety valves (with or without bursting disc) other than tanks for the carriage of compressed, liquefied or dissolved gases of Class 2., the maximum working pressure (gauge pressure) shall however be equal to the prescribed opening pressure of such safety valves (see also "Calculation pressure", "Discharge pressure", "Filling pressure" and "Test pressure"). NOTE 1: Maximum working pressure is not applicable to gravity-discharge tanks according to 6.8.2.1.14 (a). NOTE 2: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7. NOTE 3: For closed cryogenic receptacles, see Note to 6.2.1.3.6.5.
MAY — This word, or the adjective ‘OPTIONAL’, means that an item is truly optional. One vendor may choose to include the item because a particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that it enhances the product while another vendor may omit the same item. An implementation, which does not include a particular option, MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation, which does include the option, though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the same vein an implementation, which does include a particular option, MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation, which does not include the option (except, of course, for the feature the option provides).
MAY — Is permissible.
MC — Monaco
MCA — Message Channel Agent
MCA — Monetary compensatory amount
MCT — Minimum Connection Time (between two platforms in a station)
MD — Moldova (the Republic of)
MD / IAF MD — Mandatory document of IAF
MD / IAF MD — Mandatory document of IAF
mdyn — Dynamic friction coefficient
ME — Montenegro
Mean contact force — Statistical mean value of the contact force
Mean contact force (pantograph gauge context) — The mean contact force Fm is the statistical mean value of the contact force. Fm is formed by the static, dynamic and aerodynamic components of the pantograph contact force.
Mean friction coefficient — Value of instantaneous friction coefficient integrated over distance
Mean useful voltage train — Voltage identifying the dimensioning train and enables the effect on its performance to be quantified
Mean useful voltage zone — Voltage giving an indication of the quality of the power supply in a geographic zone during the peak traffic period in the timetable
Meaning — Message that a public information symbol is intended to convey.
Mechanical characteristics — Requirements concerning dimension, location, resist impacts from projectiles of the windscreen.
Mechanically refrigerated wagon — Insulated wagon either fitted with its own refrigerating device, or serviced jointly with other such units by an external refrigerating system. Such refrigerating devices include: •	Mechanical compressors; •	“Absorption”units. A mechanically refrigerated wagon should be capable, with a mean outside temperature of + 30°C, of lowering the temperature inside the empty body to, and thereafter maintaining it continuously at levels in conformity with the standards defined below: •	Class A. The internal wagon temperature should be maintained between +12°C and 0°C inclusive •	Class B. The internal wagon temperature should be maintained between +12°C and -10°C inclusive •	Class C. The internal wagon temperature should be maintained between +12°C and -20°C inclusive Sometimes also referred to as mechanical refrigerator car.
MEDIA — Action programme to promote the development of the European audiovisual industry
MEGC — See "Multiple-element gas container"
Member State organisation — An entity established in a Member State as a public law body, or as a body governed by private law entrusted with a public service mission and provided with adequate financial guarantees from the Member State.
MEP — Member of the European Parliament
Mercosur — Southern Cone Common Market (ES: Mercado Común del Sur)
Message — The combination of application data and protocol data that is transmitted by balise group, loop or radio to a train or from the train to trackside by radio.
Message Authentication Code (MAC) — Code to provide data origin authentication and data integrity.
Metadata — Any information describing the context, content and structure of records and their management over time for the purposes of, inter alia, retrieval, accessibility and reuse.
Metadata — Simply put, is data about data. It describes data, software services, and other components contained in the enterprise information systems. Examples of the types of metadata include standard data definitions, location and routing information, and synchronisation management for distributing shared data.
Metadata — Data about data. It describes data, software services, and other components contained in the enterprise information systems. Examples of the types of Metadata include standard data definitions, location and routing information, and synchronisation management for distributing shared data.
Metal and inductive components-free space between wheels — Requirement related to the functioning of axle counters, see § 3.1.3.5 of the document (ERA/ERTMS/033281): Interfaces between CCS trackside and other subsystems.
Metal hydride storage system — A single complete hydrogen storage system, including a pressure receptacle shell, metal hydride, pressure relief device, shut-off valve, service equipment and internal components used for the carriage of hydrogen only.
Metal IBC — A metal body together with appropriate service and structural equipment.
Metal mass of a vehicle — Requirement related to the functioning of loop detection system.
Metastation — A grouping of rail locations that must be collectively considered by a journey planner, when the user inserts the name of the meta station (synonym : City)
Method of implementation — Any of the methods of budget implementation referred to in Article 62, that is direct management, indirect management and shared management.
Metro (also known as ‘subway’, ‘metropolitan railway’ or ‘underground’) — An electric railway for the transport of passengers with the capacity for a heavy volume of traffic and characterised by exclusive rights-of-way, multi-car trains, high speed and rapid acceleration, sophisticated signalling as well as the absence of level crossings to allow a high frequency of trains and high platform load. Metros are also characterised by closely spaced stations, normally meaning a distance of 700 to 1 200 m between the stations. ‘High speed’ refers to the comparison with trams and light rail, and means here approximately 30 to 40 km/h on shorter distances, 40 to 70 km/h on longer distances.
Metro line/subway — An electric rail line mainly for urban transport with the capacity for heavy volumes of traffic involving very frequent train movements. Metro lines are also characterised by closely spaced stations. Also known as ‘subway’, ‘metropolitan railway’, ‘rapid rail’, ‘rapid transit’, ‘metro’ or ‘underground’. These metro lines are excluded from tracks and lines.
Metro system — UGT operated using a command and control system segregated from road traffic and any other railway system Note 1 to entry: A metro system can include underground, elevated or surface sections.
Metro vehicle — Electric railway vehicle designed for use on a metroline. Usually drawing power from a third rail.
Metro vehicle — Railway vehicle designed to run in a metro system.
MF — Saint Martin (French part)
MFN — Most favoured nation
MG — Madagascar
MH — Marshall Islands (the)
Microcar — Small car which, depending on individual Member State legislation, may need no permit to be driven and/ or benefit from lower vehicle taxation
Micrometer (μm) — Micrometer
Mid-term review / revision of the Multiannual  Financial Framework — The mid-term review/revision procedure of the MFF that allows the EU to reassess its political and budgetary priorities, taking into account the economic situation and updated macroeconomic projections
Mild steel — A steel having a minimum tensile strength between 360 N/mm2 and 440 N/mm2. NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7.
MIMAH — Methodology for the Identification of Major Accident Hazards.
Min — Minimum
Min safe antenna position — The min safe antenna position differs from the min safe front end of the train by the distance between the active Eurobalise antenna and the end of the engine according to the train orientation plus, only in Supervised Manoeuvre mode, the min safe consist length in front of/in rear of the engine, depending on whether the train orientation is the same as/opposite to the active cab respectively
Min safe front end — The minimum safe front end position differs from the estimated position by the Over-reading Amount in the distance measured from the LRBG/ORBG plus the Location Accuracy of the LRBG/ORBG plus, when relevant, the difference between the min safe consist length and nominal consist length in front of/in rear of the engine, depending on whether the train orientation is the same as/opposite to the active cab respectively
Minimum access package — A package of rights conferred by DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EC, Annex II, point 1. These rights are included in the access charge and confer access to railway infrastructure facilities and a set of services for international or domestic traffic; they include the handling of requests for infrastructure capacity, the right to use granted capacity as well as use of electrical supply equipment. IMs must deliver the listed services.
Minimum axle distance — Requirement related to the functioning of axle counters, for v > 350 km/h, see § 3.1.2.3 of the document (ERA/ERTMS/033281): Interfaces between CCS trackside and other subsystems.
Minimum contact wire height — Indication  of  the  minimum  contact  wire height expressed in metres.
Minimum contact wire height — A minimum value of the contact wire height in the span in order to avoid the arcing between one or more contact wires and vehicles in all conditions
Minimum Dwell Time — Minimum allowed value of dwell time, defined for each Stopping Point included in the Journey Profile, to be considered by the ATO-OB before departure. The minimum dwell time is applied during normal or degraded operation to aid service recovery.
Minimum horizontal curve radius, vertical concave curve radius, convex curve radius — The mechanical ability of a vehicle to pass through a horizontal curve of a defined radius. The value of minimum vertical convex curve (hump) and concave curve (bowl) radius of the track to be negotiated by the vehicle shall be announced; conditions (e.g. vehicle coupled/uncoupled).
Minimum radius of horizontal curve — Radius of the smallest horizontal curve of the track in metres.
Minimum radius of horizontal curve — Radius of the smallest horizontal curve, expressed in metres.
Minimum radius of vertical curve — Radius of the smallest vertical curv expressed in metres.
Minimum wheel diameter — Requirement related to the functioning of axle counters, for v > 350 km/h, see § 3.1.3.2 of the document (ERA/ERTMS/033281): Interfaces between CCS trackside and other subsystems.
Minimum wheel diameter for fixed obtuse crossings — Maximum  unguided  length of fixed obtuse crossings is based on a minimum wheel diameter in service expressed in millimetres.
Minor — A person below the age of 18 years;
Minor failure — See Failure, Minor
mips — Millions of instructions per second (computing)
MIRAS — Methodology for the Identification of Reference Accident Scenarios.
MISEP — Mutual information system on employment policies
Missed connection — A situation where a passenger misses one or more services in the course of a rail journey, sold in the form of a through-ticket, as a result of the delay or cancellation of one or more previous services, or of the departure of a service before the scheduled departure time
Missiles ejection — Various equipment items can be concerned by an explosion or by a pressure increase causing their burst with missile(s) ejection: ·         The BLEVE of a pressure vessel can generate missiles. ·         Explosive phenomena can occur in process equipment and cause the projection of fragments, for instance, a run-away in a reactor. ·         Atmospheric or cryogenic storage tanks can also produce missiles (tank explosion). It can mainly occur in the case of an accumulation of flammable vapours under the tank roof. ·         Mechanical bursting of pressure storage due, for example, to a increase of the pressure in the tank.
Missing link — An all modes of transport missing section of the TEN-T or a transport section that is providing the connection of core or comprehensive networks with the TEN-T corridors which hampers the continuity of the TEN-T or containing one or more bottlenecks affecting the continuity of the TEN-T.
Mission — An objective description of the fundamental task to be performed by a system. (3)
Mission, ETCS — Any train movement started under the supervision of an ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment in one the following modes: FS, LS, SR, OS, SM, NL, UN, or SN. The ETCS mission is ended when any of the following modes is entered: SB, SH, NP
MK — North Macedonia
ML — Mali
MLA — Multilateral agreements
MM — Myanmar
MM — Multimodal
MMP — Multimodal platform
MN — Mongolia
MO — Macao
Mobile subsystem — The rolling stock subsystem and the on-board control-command and signalling subsystem.
Mobile worker — Any worker employed as a member of travelling or flying personnel by an undertaking which operates transport services for passengers or goods by road, air or inland waterway.
Mobile worker engaged in interoperable cross-border services — Any worker who is a member of a train crew, who is assigned to interoperable cross-border services for more than one hour on a daily shift basis.
Mobility service provider — A legal person that provides services in return for remuneration to an end user, including the selling of recharging or refuelling services.
Modal split — The modal split of transport describes the relative share of each mode of transport, for example by road, rail or sea. It is based on passenger-kilometres (p-km) for passenger transport and tonne-kilometres (t-km) for freight or goods transport. The modal split is usually defined for a specific geographic area and/or time period. In practice, an analysis of the modal split may exclude certain modes of transport. For example, the analysis may be limited to inland transport and therefore exclude sea transport and air transport.
Modal split of passenger transport — See Modal split
Mode — An operating state of the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment with a specified split of operational responsibilities between the ERTMS/ETCS system and the driver.
Mode of transport — See Transport mode
Mode of transport — Method of transport used for the carriage of goods and passengers. For statistical reporting, the following classification of methods of transport should be used: a)	Rail; b)	Road; c)	Inland Waterways; d)	Maritime; e)	Pipeline; f)	Air; g)	Unknown mode of transport. The classification may apply only to the active mode of transport, or to both the active and the passive mode. In the latter case a two-digit code might be used, the first digit indicating the active mode and the second digit the passive mode.
Modification of authorisation — Modification, at the request of an authorising entity, of information of the registered vehicle type authorisation previously published which needs to be changed.
Module CA. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Internal production control.
Module CA1. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Internal production control plus product verification by individual examination.
Module CA2. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Internal production control plus product verification at random intervals.
Module CB. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: EC-type examination.
Module CC. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Conformity to type based on internal production control.
Module CD. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Conformity to type based on quality management system of the production process.
Module CF. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Conformity to type based on product verification.
Module CH. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Conformity based on full quality management system.
Module CH1. — Module for Conformity assessment of interoperability constituents: Conformity based on full quality management system plus design examination.
Module CV. — Module for Suitability for use of interoperability constituents: Type validation by in-service experience (suitability for use).
Module SB. — Module for EC verification of subsystems: EC-type examination.
Module SD. — Module for EC verification of subsystems: EC verification based on quality management system of the production process.
Module SF. — Module for EC verification of subsystems: EC verification based on product verification.
Module SG. — Module for EC verification of subsystems: EC verification based on unit verification.
Module SH1. — Module for EC verification of subsystems: EC verification based on full quality management system plus design examination.
Monitoring — The arrangements put in place by railway undertakings, infrastructure managers or entities in charge of maintenance to check their management system is correctly applied and effective.
Monitoring — A structured approach to ensure that risk control measures are in place, working correctly and achieving the organisation's objectives.
Monitoring — The arrangements put in place by railway undertakings, infrastructure managers or entities in charge of maintenance to check their management system is correctly applied and effective (Regulation (EU) 1078/2012).
Monitoring — Continual checking, supervising, critically observing or determining the status in order to identify change from the performance level required or expected.
MORANE — Mobile Radio for Railway Networks in Europe
Most restrictive speed profile — The speed which a train must not exceed. It is the lowest speed taking into account all the various speed profiles.
Motor car — Railway vehicle that provides tractive effort which is part of a trainset.
Motor energy — It is the principal type of motor energy used by the vehicle as certified by the competent authority of the country of registration. For hybrid or dual-fuelled vehicles adapted for using more than one type of motor energy (e.g. LPG and petrol, or electricity and diesel, etc.), the principal type of motor energy should be, where possible, an alternative fuel.
Motor Vehicle — Any power-driven vehicle which travels on the road by its own means.
Motorway — It is a road specially designed and built for motor vehicle traffic, which does not directly provide access to the properties bordering on it. Other characteristics of motorways include: - two separated carriageways for the opposing directions of traffic, except at special points or, temporarily, due to carriageway repairs etc.; - carriageways that are not crossed at the level of the carriageway by any other road, railway or tramway track, or footpath; and - the use of special signposting to indicate the road as a motorway and to exclude specific categories of road vehicles and/ or road users. In determining the extent of a motorway its entry and exit lanes are included irrespective of the location of the motorway signposts. Urban motorways are also included in this term.
MoU — Memorandum of Understanding
Moveable step — Is a retractable device integrated into the vehicle lower than the door threshold level, fully automatic and activated in conjunction with the door opening/closing sequences.
Movement authority — Permission for a train to run to a specific location within the constraints of the infrastructure.
Movement Authority (MA) — Permission for a train (shunting composition) to move to a specific location with supervision of speed.
Movement Authority (MA) — Permission for a train to move to  a specific location with supervision of speed.
Moving block — A block whose length is defined by the position of the train occupying the section of track ahead. The minimum block length would be from the rear most part of the occupying train to a point on the track where, if the train braked from its current speed, the front of the occupying train would be when the train came to a stand.
MP — Northern Mariana Islands (the)
MPLW — See Maximum permissible laden weight
MQ — Martinique
MQ — Message Queuing
MQMD — Message Queuing Message Descriptor
MR — Mauritania
MR1 — Maintenance Release 1
MRA — Mutual Recognition agreements
MRDT — Most Relevant Displayed Target
MRSP — Most Restrictive Speed Profile
MS — EU or EEA Member State
MS — Member State
MS — Montserrat
MSA — Multilateral Steel agreement
MSC — Mobile Switching Centre
mstat — Static friction coefficient
MT — Malta
mt — Maltese
MTBF — Mean Time Between Failure
MTOE — Million tonne of oil equivalent
MU — Mauritius
Multi-annual Contract (MAC) — A medium to long term agreement between the state and its infrastructure manager outlining the funding to be given to the IM in exchange for agreed levels of service/performance.
Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF) — A seven-year framework regulating the EU’s annual budget.
Multi-donor action — Any action where Union funds are pooled with at least one other donor.
Multi-rail track — Track with more than two rails, where at least two pairs of respective rails are designed to be operated as separate single tracks, with or without different track gauges.
Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) — The long-term EU budget that establishes the spending priorities and maximum amounts that the EU may spend in particular areas over a fixed period of several years. The expenditure ceilings in the MFF Regulation are not equivalent to those in the EU budget, which are always lower. The MFF also includes income sources for the EU budget and correction mechanisms for the period in question (currently 2014-20).
Multidisciplinary approach — way of working involving different functions and expertise in one team on a specific subject EXAMPLE: Engineering, safety and procurement.
Multilateral approval — For the carriage of radioactive material, means approval by the relevant competent authority of the country of origin of the design or shipment, as applicable, and by the competent authority of each country through or into which the consignment is to be carried.
Multimodal digital mobility service — multimodal digital mobility service as defined in Article 4, point (24), of Directive 2010/40/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (28).
Multimodal freight terminal — A structure equipped for transhipment between at least two transport modes, or between two different rail systems, and for temporary storage of freight, such as terminals in inland or maritime ports, along inland waterways and in airports, as well as rail road terminals.
Multimodal freight transport — Transport of goods by at least two different modes of transport. Intermodal transport is a particular type of multimodal transport. International multimodal transport is often based on a contract regulating the full multimodal transport.
Multimodal passenger hub — A connection point between at least two transport modes for passengers, where travel information, access to public transport and transfers between modes are ensured, such as park-and-ride stations, and which acts as an interface within and between urban nodes and between urban nodes and longer-distance transport networks.
Multimodal transport — The carriage of passengers or freight, or both, using two or more modes of transport.
Multimodal transport — Carriage of goods by two or more modes of transport.
Multimodal transport operator — Any person who concludes a multimodal transport contract and assumes the wholeresponsibility for the performance thereof as a carrier or a transport operator. In the definition, a person means either a physical or legal person or a company.
Multiple Corridor path — A capacity request can cover more than one corridor. A PaP offer harmonised by different corridors may be published and indicated as such. .
Multiple operation — Is an operational formation consisting of more than one unit, including: –	trainsets designed in such a way that several of them (of the type under assessment) are capable of being coupled together to operate as a single train controlled from 1 driver's cab; –	locomotives designed in such a way that several of them (of the type under assessment) are capable of being included in a single train controlled from one driver's cab.
Multiple sign — Sign that combines two or more safety signs and associated supplementary signs on the same rectangular carrier.
Multiple unit (MU) — Trainset in which all railway vehicles are designed to carry payload. Note 1 to entry: Payload can be passengers, luggage or cargo. Note 2 to entry: Some MUs include intermediate powered railway vehicles which are designed to permit passengers to pass through; these are therefore also designed to carry payload.
Multiple Units — Two or more traction units in service, mechanically, pneumatically and electrically coupled, which are operated by one driver.
Multiple variation — A service that is described with more than one POP segment
Multiple-element gas container (MEGC) — A unit containing elements which are linked to each other by a manifold and mounted on a frame. The following elements are considered to be elements of a multipleelement gas container: cylinders, tubes, pressure drums and bundles of cylinders as well as tanks for the carriage of gases as defined in 2.2.2.1.1 having a capacity of more than 450 litres. NOTE: For UN MEGCs, see Chapter 6.7.
Multiple-unit — Composition of railcar(s) and railcar trailer(s) or locomotive(s) and passenger railway vehicle(s), which when coupled to another multiple unit can be controlled by a single driver.
Multiplier effect — The investment by eligible final recipients divided by the amount of the Union contribution.
MUST — This word, or the terms ‘REQUIRED’ or ‘SHALL’, mean that the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification.
MUST NOT — This phrase, or the phrase ‘SHALL NOT’, means that the definition is an absolute prohibition of the specification.
MV — Maldives
MW — Malawi
MX — Mexico
MY — Malaysia
MYS — Marshalling yards
MZ — Mozambique
M_NVCONTACT — On-Board  system  reaction  when  T_NVCONTACT  expires According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
M_NVDERUN — Entry of Driver ID permitted while running  According  to the specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
N HRS — Number of hours
N INJ — Number of injuries
N ITEMS — Number of quantified individual items
N SQM — Number of square metres
N+3 (rule) — Budgetary commitments relating to the operational programmes are made per annual tranches.  The N+3 rule foresees that a commitment made at year N has to be covered by the same amount of pre-financing and interim payment claims before 31 December N+3 (for example, a commitment made in 2014 has to be fully covered by pre-financing and payment claims before 31 December 2017). The amount not covered is de-committed, which means that the Member State loses the funding. The purpose of the rule is to ensure financial discipline in managing the EU funds by obliging the Member States to implement the projects in a dynamic manner and to avoid problems at the very end of the cycle.
N.O.S. entry (not otherwise specified entry) — A collective entry to which substances, mixtures, solutions or articles may be assigned if they: (a) are not mentioned by name in Table A of Chapter 3.2, and (b) exhibit chemical, physical and/or dangerous properties corresponding to the Class, classification code, packing group and the name and description of the n.o.s. entry.
NA — ATO Not Available
NA — Namibia
NAB — National Accreditation Body
NABS — Nomenclature for the analysis and comparison of science budgets and programmes
NACE — General industrial classification of economic activities within the European Union
NACE/Rev.2 — Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community, Official Journal of the European Union N° L 393/1, 30 December 2006
NAFO — North-West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation
NAFTA — North American Free Trade agreement
Name  of  signal — Identifier of  signal.
Name of beneficiary — The name given by the beneficiary in documents submitted to the Commission. Since this is a legal name it may differ from the name known to the general public. Moreover, certain organisations are registered in different countries (for example in the case of cooperation with national subsidiaries), possibly with variations in their name, each of which is a different beneficiary in the eyes of the Commission. In addition, there should be no information published for beneficiaries of public procurement contracts lower than EUR 15 000.
Name of operational point — Name normally related to the town or village or to traffic control purpose
NAMSA — NATO Maintenance and Supply Agency
NARIC — National Academic Recognition Information Centre
NASA — National Aeronautics and Space Administration (US)
NASCO — North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organisation
National  fire  category  of  rolling stock required — Categorisation  on  how  a  passenger  train with a fire on board will continue to operate for a defined time period.
National Access Point — A digital interface set up by a Member State that constitutes a single point of access to data.
National accreditation body — A national accreditation body as defined in Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
National accreditation body — The meaning assigned to it by Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
National accreditation body — A national accreditation body as defined in point (11) of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
National accreditation body — National accreditation body as defined in point 11 of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
National accreditation body — The sole body in a Member State that performs accreditation with authority derived from the State.
National authorities — National statistical institutes and other bodies responsible in each Member State for producing European statistics.
National classification for load capability — National classification for load capability
National cybersecurity strategy — A coherent framework of a Member State providing strategic objectives and priorities in the area of cybersecurity and the governance to achieve them in that Member State.
National Deviation — Any modification of, addition to or deletion from the content of an EN made in a national standard within the same scope as the EN.
National Enforcement bodies — It is a body or bodies, designated by each Member State, responsible for the enforcement of this Regulation. Each body shall take the measures necessary to ensure that the rights of passengers are respected. 2. Each body shall be independent in its organisation, funding decisions, legal structure and decision-making of any infrastructure manager, charging body, allocation body or railway undertaking. 3. Member States shall inform the Commission of the body or bodies designated in accordance with this Article and of its or their respective responsibilities. The Commission and the bodies designated shall publish that information on their websites
National fire category of rolling stock required — Categorisation how a passenger train with a fire on board will continue to operate for a defined time period - according to national  rules  if  they  exist
National instruction — An instruction defined at national level or by an infrastructure manager which covers situations specific to a Class B system or the transition between class A and class B systems.
National line identification — Unique  line  identification  or  unique  line number within Member State.
National on-board signalling systems — Requirement to have national on-board train protection systems installed on-board (such as EBICAB) and corresponding functional requirements.
National qualifications framework — An instrument for the classification of qualifications according to a set of criteria for specified levels of learning achieved, which aims at integrating and coordinating national qualifications subsystems and improve the transparency, access, progression and quality of qualifications in relation to the labour market and civil society
National qualifications system — All aspects of a Member State’s activity related to the recognition of learning and other mechanisms that link education and training to the labour market and civil society. That includes the development and implementation of institutional arrangements and processes relating to quality assurance, assessment and the award of qualifications. A national qualifications system may be composed of several subsystems and may include a national qualifications framework
National rail transport — Rail transport where the goods are both loaded and unloaded within the same reporting Member State, irrespective of the route followed by the railway vehicle.
National railway transport — Railway transport between two places (a place of loading/embarkation and a place of unloading/disembarkation) located in the same country. It may involve transit through a second country. Sometimes referred to as domestic railway transport.
National reference value (NRV) — A reference measure indicating, for the Member State concerned, the maximum tolerable level for a railway risk category.
National requirement for testing — This parameter should address rules (if any) for testing.
National road freight transport — It is defined as road transport between two places (a place of loading and a place of unloading) located in the same country by a vehicle registered in that country.
National rules — All  binding  rules  adopted in  a  Member  State,  irrespective  of  the  body  issuing  them,  which contain railway safety or technical requirements, other than those laid down by Union or international rules which are applicable within that Member State to railway undertakings, infrastructure managers or third parties.
National rules — All  binding  rules  adopted in  a  Member  State,  irrespective  of  the  body  issuing  them,  which contain railway safety or technical requirements, other than those laid down by Union or international rules, and which are applicable within that Member State to railway undertakings, infrastructure managers or third parties.
National rules — All binding rules adopted in a Member State, irrespective of the body issuing them, which contain railway safety or technical requirements, other than those laid down by Union or international rules, and which are applicable within that Member State to railway undertakings, infrastructure managers or third parties (Directive (EU) 2016/798).
National safety authority — A safety authority as defined in point (7) of Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2016/798.
National safety authority — National Safety Authority means: (a) the national body entrusted with the tasks regarding railway safety in accordance with this Directive; (b) any body entrusted by several Member States with the tasks referred to in point (a) in order to ensure a unified safety regime; (c) any body entrusted by a Member State and a third country with the tasks referred to in point (a) in order to ensure a unified safety regime, provided that the Union has concluded an agreement to this effect with the third country concerned or that that Member State has concluded such agreement in accordance with an empowerment granted by the Union to that effect.
National safety authority (NSA) — A safety authority as defined in Article 3(g) of the Safety Directive.
National Safety Authority (NSA) — The national body entrusted with the tasks regarding railway safety by a Member State in order to ensure a unified safety regime in Europe.
National safety authority (NSA) — A safety authority as defined in Article 3(7) of Directive(EU) 2016/798.
National safety authority for the area of use or NSA for the area of use — The national safety authority when it performs one or more of the following tasks: (a)  the assessments specified in Article 21(5)(b) of Directive (EU) 2016/797; (b) the consultations requested in Article 21(8) of Directive (EU) 2016/797; (c) issues the temporary authorisations, when required, for using the vehicle for tests on the network and takes measures to ensure that the tests on the network can take place as specified in Article 21(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
National Standard — A standard adopted by a national standardisation body.
National standardisation body — A body notified to the Commission by a Member State in accordance with Article 27 of this Regulation.
National supervisory authority — An independent public authority which is established by a Member State pursuant to Article 51 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or pursuant to Article 41 of Directive (EU) 2016/680.
National system mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode in which the supervision of the train is ensured by a National System.
National train control system — A previously installed train control system defined as Class B system in CCS TSI.
National transport — Rail transport between two places (a place of loading/embarkation and a place of unloading/disembarkation) located in the reporting country. It may involve transit through a second country.
National values — Values that are transmitted to a train when entering the infrastructure of an administration related to rules and regulations of that administration. National values may be changed within an administrations area.
National Values used for the brake model — Set  of  parameters  for  adapting  the  braking  curves  calculated by    the    ETCS    on-board    system    to    match    accuracy, performance and safety margins imposed by the infrastructure manager. It copies the content  of Packet 3 or of Packet 203  as defined in  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
NATO — North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
Nature of Section of Line — Kind  of  section  of  line  expressing  size  of presented   data   which   depends   on   fact whether it connects OPs generated by div ision  of  a  big  node  into  several  OPs  or not.
Navigable inland waterway — It is a waterway on which vessels with a carrying capacity of not less than 50 tonnes can navigate when normally loaded. Included are waterways of maritime character, waterways designated by the reporting country as suitable for navigation primarily by seagoing ships.
Navigable waterway — See Navigable inland waterway
NB-Rail — Coordination group of notified bodies for railway products and systems
NC — New Caledonia
NCCI — Non contradictory Complementary Information
NCI — New Community Instrument
NDP — Nationally Determined Parameters
NDT — Non-Destructive Test
NDT — Non-Destructive Test
NE — Niger (the)
NEA — Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD)
NEAFC — North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission
Near miss — An event that could have compromised the availability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of stored, transmitted or processed data or of the services offered by, or accessible via, network and information systems, but that was successfully prevented from materialising or that did not materialise.
NEB (National Enforcement Body) — Organisations designated by each member State, according to art. 30 of Regulation 1371/2007, to guarantee its good application. The list of NEBs is on http://ec.europa.eu/transport/passengers/rail/rail_en.htm
Necessary and sufficient causes (NSC) - left side — In Bow-tie Terminology: A term referring to the immediate causes that can provoke a critical event. For a given critical event, the list of NSCs is supposed to be exhaustive, which means that at least one of the NSCs must be fulfilled so that the critical event can occur.
Negation — Indication of the absence or opposite of something actual or positive.
Neighbouring country — A third country falling within the scope of the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Enlargement Policy, and the European Economic Area, the European Free Trade Association or the Trade and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community, of the one part, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, of the other part (26).
NET — Network
Net balance — The difference between an EU country’s contribution to the EU budget and the amount of EU funding it receives. This does not take into account other financial, economic and political benefits, e.g. participation in the internal market, whereby companies can operate anywhere in the EU.
Net explosive mass (NEM) — The total mass of the explosive substances, without the packagings, casings, etc. (Net explosive quantity (NEQ), net explosive contents (NEC), net explosive weight (NEW) or net mass of explosive contents are often used to convey the same meaning.).
Network — The lines, stations, terminals, and all kinds of fixed equipment needed to ensure safe and continuous operation of the Union rail system.
Network — The entire railway infrastructure managed by an infrastructure manager.
Network — The lines, stations, terminals, and all kinds of fixed equipment needed to ensure safe and continuous operation of the rail system.
Network and Corridor Information Portal (NCI) — The NCI is a common web portal where NSs (Network Statements) and CIDs (Corridor Information Documents) are made available in a digitalised way.
Network and information system — (a) an electronic communications network as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972; (b)  any device or group of interconnected or related devices, one or more of which, pursuant to a programme, carry out automatic processing of digital data; or (c) digital data stored, processed, retrieved or transmitted by elements covered under points (a) and (b) for the purposes of their operation, use, protection and maintenance.
Network and information system — A network and information system as defined in Article 6, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2022/2555 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Network characteristics — The characteristics of a network as described by the TSIs and, where relevant, by national rules.
Network of Representative Bodies (NRB) — An ERA working group encompassing members of the GRB to meet representatives of the Agency.
Network PaP (NetPaP) — Network Pre-arranged Paths (NetPaPs) are pre-arranged paths designed to foster the optimal use of infrastructure capacity and address the needs for capacity on specific geographical traffic routes or market segments with special requirements for train path characteristics. They may be offered on a single Rail Freight Corridor, or on two or more connected Rail Freight Corridors. Network PaPs consist of contiguous pre-arranged path sections linked together. They are identified by a special ID or marker in pre-arranged path catalogues and IT tools.
Network project — A project to place in service new, renewed or upgraded fixed equipment composed of more than one structural subsystem.
Network statement — The statement which sets out in detail the general rules, deadlines, procedures and criteria for charging and capacity-allocation schemes, including such other information as is required to enable applications for infrastructure capacity.
Neutron radiation detector — A device that detects neutron radiation. In such a device, a gas may be contained in a hermetically sealed electron tube transducer that converts neutron radiation into a measureable electric signal.
New energy subsystem — An energy subsystem placed into service after 28 September 2023, which is created where no traction power supply and OCL previously existed.
New technology — set of techniques which offer a significant improvement over the established techniques for the development and production (3.1.2.16) of products and services which have never been part of the controlled activities of the organization, and which can be beyond the state of art. Note 1 to entry: The inputs are generally originated from research or innovation activities. Note 2 to entry: A new technology can be linked to a complete system, e.g. brakes, HVAC, electronics.
NF — Norfolk Island
NG — Nigeria
NGL — Natural Gas Liquids
NGO — Non-governmental organisation
NI — Nicaragua
NIC — Newly industrialised country
Night shift — Any shift of at least three hours' work during the night time.
Night time — Any period of not less than seven hours, as defined by national law, and which must include in any case the period between midnight and 5 a.m..
Night time — Any period of not less than seven hours, as defined by national law, and which must include, in any case, the period between midnight and 5.00.
Night worker — It means: (a) on the one hand, any worker, who, during night time, works at least three hours of his daily working time as a normal course; and (b) on the other hand, any worker who is likely during night time to work a certain proportion of his annual working time, as defined at the choice of the Member State concerned: (i) by national legislation, following consultation with the two sides of industry; or (ii) by collective agreements or agreements concluded between the two sides of industry at national or regional level.
NIP — National indicative programme
NIS — New independent States (of the former Soviet Union)
NL — Non-Leading mode
NL — Non Leading mode
NL — Netherlands (the)
nl — Dutch
NL — Non Leading
NMVOC — Non-methane volatile organic compound
NNTR — Notified National Technical Rule
NO — Norway
No GSMR coverage — Indication if there is a no GSMR coverage
No power mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode in which the on-board equipment is not powered and the emergency brake is commanded.
No regrets level — Level of internalisation at which individuals or companies achieve a net personal/private benefit (e.g. savings on fuel bills) which exceeds the loss in welfare due to a given policy. The existence of “no regrets” options will tend to increase the political acceptability of internalisation policies
NoBo — Notified Body
NoBO — Notified Body
NoBos issue — “EC certificates of conformity/suitability for use” and “Certificates of verification”.
NOI — Noise (TSI)
NOI — Noise
Noise in driver's cab — Maximum noise level allowed in the cab, including horn sound level inside the cab.
Noise indicator — A physical scale for the description of environmental noise, which has a relationship with a harmful effect.
Noise mapping — The presentation of data on an existing or predicted noise situation in terms of a noise indicator, indicating breaches of any relevant limit value in force, the number of people affected in a certain area, or the number of dwellings exposed to certain values of a noise indicator in a certain area.
Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (NUTS) — The Classification of Territorial Units for Statistics (NUTS; French: Nomenclature des unités territoriales statistiques) is a geocode standard for referencing the subdivisions of countries for statistical purposes.[1][2][3][4][5][6] The standard is developed and regulated by the European Union, and thus only covers the member states of the EU in detail. The Classification of Territorial Units for Statistics is instrumental in the European Union's Structural Fund delivery mechanisms and for locating the area where goods and services subject to European public procurement legislation are to be delivered.
Nominal contact wire height — A nominal value of the contact wire height at a support in the normal conditions
Nominal track gauge — A  single  value  expressed  in  millimetres that identifies the track gauge.
Nominal track gauge — Value expressed in millimetres that identifies the track gauge.
Nominal track gauge — A single value which identifies the track gauge but may differ from the design track gauge.
Nominal voltage — Voltage by which an installation or part of an installation is designated
Non stopping area — Area defined by the Infrastructure Manager where it may not be safe or suitable to stop a train.
Non-application of a TSI — Certain circumstance, by which projects can be exempted from having to comply with all or part of a TSI or TSIs (Article 7 of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Non-application of a TSI — Certain  circumstance,  by  which  projects  can  be  exempted  from  having  to comply with all or part of a TSI or TSIs (Article 7 of Directive (EU) 2016/797).
Non-ATO Train — Non-ATO equipped trains and trains with inoperative ATO-OB equipment.
Non-conventional railway system — Railway system in which rolling stock is supported and guided by means other than steel wheels on a pair of steel rails, located beneath the rolling stock. EXAMPLE:Monorail systems, magnetic levitation (Maglev) systems, hanging systems, rubber tyred systems
Non-dangerous goods event — A transport event which does not involve any dangerous goods transport units.
Non-equipped line — A line without operational trackside Automatic Train Protection system.
Non-functional requirement — Technical requirement that defines attributes serving as constraints or restrictions and ensuring the usability and effectiveness but not affecting the functionality of products and services Note 1 to entry: As shown in Annex B, non-functional requirements include: - performance requirements (3.1.3.8); - integration requirements (3.1.3.3); - other non-functional requirements. Note 2 to entry: Some examples of other non-functional requirements are: - colour; - corrosion control; - electro-magnetic interference/electro-magnetic compatibility (EMI/EMC); - noise; - reliability, availability, maintainability, safety (RAMS); - aluminium car body; - labels; - obsolescence; - usability.
Non-GSM-R radio system — Requirements for national radio systems if the installation on a vehicle is mandatory for authorisation.
Non-leading mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode when it is connected to an active cab which is not in the leading engine of the train.
Non-maintained safety sign — Sign in which the integral lamps are in operation only when the power supply to the normal lighting fails.
Non-regression — Current risk level for existing systems shall not be increased. Note: There is a link to the GAME (Globalement au moins équivalent) principle. In essence, the non-regression principle would be equivalent to prohibiting any increase in existing risk levels relating to transport of dangerous goods.
Non-stopping area — Area defined by the Infrastructure Manager where it may not be safe or suitable to stop a train.
Non-technical requirement — Requirement affecting the delivery of the product or service. Note 1 to entry: See Annex B. EXAMPLE:Warranty, payments, quality assurance, training, communication, time, commercial.
Non-usage — When a Railway Undertaking or other Applicant does not use a path that has been allocated to it.
Non-vital — A description applied to those parts of the signalling system whose failure or non-availability does not directly endanger rail traffic or reduce the integrity of the signalling system.
Normal Operating — It is to be understood as when trains run along the line for their own purposes without any exceptional provision to mitigate their impact on infrastructure.
Normal power recharging point — A recharging point with a power output less than or equal to 22 kW for the transfer of electricity to an electric vehicle.
Normal running direction — The normal running direction is: -  the  same  as  the  direction  defined  by the start and end of the SoL: (N) -  the  opposite  to  the  direction  defined by the start and end of the SoL: (O) -  both directions: (B)
Normal service — The railway operating to a planned timetable service.
Normal service — Planned timetable service
Normal service — As defined in SS-104 clause 5.1.1.5: “The expression `train running a normal service’ shall be understood as `train which is not penalised because of a reduction of performance or safety’.
Notified bodies — The bodies which are responsible for assessing the conformity or suitability for use of the interoperability constituents or for appraising the ‘EC’ procedure for verification of the subsystems.
Notified bodies — The bodies which are responsible for assessing the conformity or suitability for use of the Interoperability Constituents or for appraising the EC procedure for verification of the subsystems.
Notified body — A body as defined by Article 2(j) of Directive 2008/57/EC.
Notified national rule — Any national rule notified by Member States under Council Directive 96/48/EC or, Directive 2001/16/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Directives 2004/49/EC and 2008/57/EC.
NP — ATO No Power
NP — No Power mode
NP — Nepal
NR — National Rule
NR — Network Rail – Britain’s Railway Infrastructure Manager
NR — Nauru
NRT — Non-integrated reservation tickets - This is a way of selling train tickets meant for international or foreign sales, where the issuer can produce the ticket locally, without any online transaction with an attributing system. The NRT tickets are always open tickets, i.e. the contract of carriage is valid on any NRT train serving the route marked on the ticket, within a defined validity period. To issue a NRT ticket the issuer needs a list of OD’s (series) and one or more tables of prices corresponding to distance ranges. Reservations can (in some cases must) be purchased together with the ticket.
NRT — Non-integrated reservation ticket - This is a way of selling train tickets meant for international or foreign sales, where the issuer can produce the ticket locally, without any online transaction with an attributing system.
NRT — Non-integrated reservation tickets - This is a way of selling train tickets meant for international or foreign sales, where the issuer can produce the ticket locally, without any online transaction with an attributing system. The NRT tickets are always open tickets, i.e. the contract of carriage is valid on any NRT train serving the route marked on the ticket, within a defined validity period.
NRT (Non-integrated Reservation Ticket) — Ticket which is issued as a national or international coupon without a reservation integrated with it for journeys for which reservations are not required (from the International Rail Transport Committee – CIT - glossary)
NRT Non (integrated) reservation ticket — Ticket which is issued as a national or international coupon without a reservation integrated with it for journeys for which reservations are not required.
NRT train — A train that a passenger can board having bought a NRT ticket, in the case of international or foreign sales
NS — Nederlandse Spoorwegen – Dutch Railways
NSA — National Safety Authority
NSR — National Safety Rule
NST — Abbreviation of Standard goods classification for transport statistics
NST 2007 — Standard goods classification for transport statistics
NST 2007 — Standard Goods Nomenclature for Transport Statistics
NTC — National Train Control system
NTC — National Train Control
NTD — No time dependency
NTR — National Technical Rule
NU — Niue
Number of active GSM-R mobiles (EDOR) or simultaneous communication session on board for  ETCS  level  2  needed  to  perform  radio block centre handovers without having an op erational  disruption — Number of simultaneous communication session on board for ETCS level 2 required for a smooth running of the train. This relates to the radio block centre (RBC) handling of communi cation   sessions.    Not   safety   critical   and    no    matter   of interoperability.
Number of passengers — The number of trips by rail passengers, where each trip is defined as the movement from the place of embarkation to the place of disembarkation, with or without transfers from one rail vehicle to another. If passengers use the services of more than one railway undertaking, when possible they shall not be counted more than once.
NUTS — Nomenclature of Territorial Units for Statistics, Eurostat
NUTS — Nomenclature of territorial units for statistics (Eurostat) (NUTS 1, 2, etc.)
NUTS region — A region as established by Regulation (EC) No 1059/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council (27) and classified in Annex I of that Regulation.
NVR — National Vehicle Register
NVR — National vehicle register referred to in Article 47 of Directive (EU) 2016/797
NVR — National Vehicle Register
NVR — National vehicle Register
NZ — New Zealand
N_DGSC — Number of vulnerabilities damaged by the considered Dangerous Goods SCenario
OAPEC — Organization of Arab Petroleum Exporting Countries
OAS — Organisation of American States
OAU — Organization of African Unity (replaced by the AU)
OBB — Österreichische Bundesbahnen – Austrian Federal Railways
Object colour — Named colour of safety sign elements specified in terms of chromaticity coordinates x, y of the CIE 2° standard colorimetric observer and either luminance factor or luminance.
Objective — Result to be achieved. A safety objective must be specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and time-based. It must also be set at relevant functions and levels within the organisation.
Objectivity — Statistics must be developed, produced and disseminated in a systematic, reliable and unbiased manner. it implies the use of professional and ethical standards, and that the policies and practices followed are transparent to users and survey respondents.
Observation — Objections placed by applicants due to deficiencies in the draft offer  or in case the draft offer does not reflect the timetable concept in the request. Observations need to be considered by the responsible IMs in the process of preparation of the final offer.
Obstacle-free route — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. An obstacle-free route is a link between two or more public areas dedicated to the transport of passengers such as specified in point 2.1.1. It can be navigated by all persons with disabilities and reduced mobility. In order to achieve this, the route can be divided to better meet the needs of all persons with disabilities and reduced mobility. The combination of all the parts of the obstacle free route constitutes the route accessible for all persons with disabilities and reduced mobility
OBU — On Board Unit
OBU — On-Board Unit
OCAS — Organisation of Central American States
OCC — Operation Control Centre
OCC — Occurrence
Occupied — A track section having any part of a train present upon it.
Occurrence — Occurrence means any safety-related event which endangers or which, if not corrected or addressed, could endanger a given activity and includes in particular an accident and incident.
OCL — Overhead Contact Line
OCL — Overhead contact line
OCTs — Overseas countries and territories
OD — Overseas department
Odometer accuracy — The extent to which the odometer might make underestimation/overestimation in measuring the movement of the train.
Odometry — The process of measuring the train’s movement along the track. Used for speed measurement and distance measurement.
Odometry reference location — The reference location to which refers the train based odometer distance reading.
OECD — Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Off-Line KMS — KMS where distribution, deletion or updating of key entries requires staff intervention on the target device.
Offer — See availability
Official of the Union — Any person who has been appointed, as  provided for in these Staff Regulations, to an established post on the staff of one of the institutions of the Union  by an  instrument issued by the Appointing Authority of that institution. This definition in paragraph 1 shall also apply to persons  appointed by Union bodies to whom these Staff Regulations apply under the Union acts establishing them (hereinafter ‘agencies’). Any references to ‘institutions’ in these Staff Regulations shall apply to agencies, save as otherwise provided in these Staff Regulations.
Official repository of records — A system, recognised and approved by the Secretariat-General, in which records held by the Commission are collected, organised and categorised to facilitate records retrieval, distribution, use, disposal or preservation.
Official website — The company’s public website where commercial information is released to the customer. The website shall be machine readable by respecting web content accessibility guidelines
Officials of the Commission (Eurostat) — The officials of the Communities, within the meaning of Article 1 of the Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Communities, working at the Community statistical authority.
Offshore bulk container — A bulk container specially designed for repeated use for carriage to, from and between offshore facilities. An offshore bulk container is designed and constructed in accordance with the guidelines for the approval of offshore containers handled in open seas specified by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) in document MSC/Circ.860.
Offshore work — Work performed mainly on or from offshore installations (including drilling rigs), directly or indirectly in connection with the exploration, extraction or exploitation of mineral resources, including hydrocarbons, and diving in connection with such activities, whether performed from an offshore installation or a vessel.
OFOD — On-flight origin/destination
OHIM — Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Design) (replaced by the European Union Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO))
OIS — On-board [Passenger] Information System
OJ — Official Journal of the European Union
OJ — Official Journal of the European Union (before 1 February 2003: Official Journal of the European Communities)
OJ/OJEU — Official Journal of the European Union
OL — Overlap
OLN — Open line (railway)
OM — Oman
On sight mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that gives the driver partial responsibility for the safe control of his train. In this mode the train possesses a movement authority but the track ahead might be occupied by another train.
On track Machines (OTMs) — Vehicles specially designed for construction and maintenance of the track and infrastructure. OTMs are used in different modes: working mode, transport mode as self-propelling vehicle, transport mode as a hauled vehicle.
On-board control command and signalling — Parameter without explanation in the document
On-board control-command and signalling — All the on-board equipment required to ensure safety and to command and control movements of trains authorised to travel on the network.
On-board Energy Measurement System (EMS) — Is the system for measurement of all active and reactive electric energy taken from or returned (during regenerative braking) to the Overhead Contact Line (‘OCL’) by the electric unit.
On-Board equipment — The equipment carried on the train with the aim of supervising vehicle operation.
On-board lift — Is a device integrated in the doorway area of a vehicle that shall be able to overcome the maximum height difference between the vehicle floor and the station platform where operated.
On-board power supply and control systems — Parameter without explanation in the document
On-board radio system — Parameter without explanation in the document
On-Board recording device — A device (outside the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment) that records and stores data for subsequent analysis (e.g. further to a train accident).
On-board signalling — Parameter without explanation in the document
On-board systems — Systems assisting the driver to observe line-side signalling and in cab signalling and thus providing protection of danger points and enforcement of speed limits. On-board TPSs are described as follows: (a)    Warning, providing automatic warning to driver. (b)    Warning and automatic stop, providing automatic warning to driver and automatic stop when passing a signal at danger. (c)     Warning and automatic stop and discrete supervision of speed, providing protection of danger points, where ‘discrete supervision of speed’ means supervision of speed at certain locations (speed traps) at the approach of a signal. (d)    Warning and automatic stop and continuous supervision of speed, providing protection of danger points and continuous supervision of the speed limits of the line, where ‘continuous supervision of speed’ means continuous indication and enforcement of the maximal allowed target speed on all sections of the line. Type (d) is regarded as Automatic Train Protection (ATP) system.
On-board tools and portable equipment — Required on-board tools and portable equipment, e.g. hand-lamp with red and white light, short circuiting equipment for track-circuits, a respirator. Excluded: items for operational reasons such as scotches, coupling adapters, rescue couplers (see chapter 2), fire extinguishing equipment (see chapter 10) and see chapter 13 ‘Specific operational requirements’.
On-Board Unit — See ERTMS/ETCS ON-BOARD EQUIPMENT.
On-ground energy data collecting system (data collecting service) (DCS) — On-ground service collecting the CEBD from an Energy Measurement System
On-Line KMS — KMS allowing remote distribution, deletion or updating of key entries in the target device.
One stop shop — An international partnership between rail infrastructure managers providing a single point of contact for rail customers for the purposes of: - ordering specified train paths in international freight traffic, - monitoring the movement of the entire train, - generally also invoicing track access charges on behalf of infrastructure managers
One Stop Shop (OSS) — An international partnership between rail Infrastructure Managers providing a single point of contact for rail customers for the purposes of: - Ordering specified train paths in international freight traffic, - Monitoring the entire train movement, - Generally also invoicing track access charges on behalf of IMs.
One way journey — A journey from an origin A to a destination B, without return to A
One-Stop Shop (OSS) — A one-stop shop is a single point of contact. The Infrastructure Managers who are members of RNE have set up ‘One-Stop Shops’ working as national customer contact points. For international train path requests, the customer needs only to contact one of these One Stop Shops, which will initiate the whole international train path allocation process. The OSS aims to provide competent and efficient assistance across all borders, based on transparent, confidential and non-discriminatory procedures. TAF TSI definition (this only concerns freight traffic, as TAF only deals with freight): 'An international partnership between rail Infrastructure Managers providing a single point of contact for rail customers for the purposes of: - ordering specified train paths in international freight traffic, - monitoring the entire train movement, - generally also invoicing track access charges on behalf of IMs.'
Online marketplace — An online marketplace as defined in Article 2, point (n), of Directive 2005/29/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Online search engine — An online search engine as defined in Article 2, point (5), of Regulation (EU) 2019/1150 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ONP — Open network provision
OP — Organophosphate
OP  primary  location  code — Primary location code developed  for information exchange  in accordance  with  the  TSIs  relating  to  the  telematics  appli cations  subsystem
OPE — Operation and Traffic Management
OPE — Operation
OPEC — Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
Open access — General definition: the legal process by which operators who are neither State-owned (most European countries) nor franchised (UK situation) can gain access to the railway infrastructure; this enables them to run services complementing or competing with the services run by other operators. EU definition: one of the cornerstones of European railway policy is open access to infrastructure. Thus DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU sets out a framework allowing open access operations on railway lines by companies other than the historic operators ('incumbents'). With a view to ensuring non-discriminatory treatment of all Railway Undertakings, it lays down common rules and principles governing conditions of access to the network. These include: schemes for track access charges, access to a range of services and the use of appropriate facilities (such as catenaries, refuelling facilities, freight terminals and maintenance facilities), charges for these services and facilities. In addition, EU legislation provides fo Regulatory Bodies, which offer Railway Undertakings a safeguard against any anti-competitive practices that might constitute a barrier to entering the railway market.
Open Access mode — Mode of train operation where only one RU is involved, which runs the train on various infrastructures. This RU contracts the needed paths with all involved IMs.
Open container — An open top container or a platform based container.
Open container — See "Container"
Open cryogenic receptacle — A transportable thermally insulated receptacle for refrigerated liquefied gases maintained at atmospheric pressure by continuous venting of the refrigerated liquefied gas.
Open parameter — In the harmonised risk estimation model, this term is used to characterise a parameter of the model whose value can be set by the user. See also “Corrected value”.
Open point — Certain technical aspect corresponding to the essential requirements, which cannot be explicitly covered in a TSI (Article 4(6) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Open point — Certain  technical  aspect  corresponding  to  the  essential  requirements,  which cannot be explicitly covered in a TSI(Article 4(6) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Open point — Certain  technical  aspect  corresponding  to  the  essential  requirements,  which cannot be explicitly covered in a TSI (Article 4(6) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Open point — A component of a TSI where the need of a European standard is acknowledged, but the need cannot be immediately satisfied for lack of existing standards
Open points — Technical aspects relating to essential requirements which have not been covered in a UTP and are explicitly indicated as such in that UTP.
Open source licence — A licence whereby the reuse, redistribution and modification of software is permitted for all uses on the basis of a unilateral declaration by the right holder that may be subject to certain conditions, and where the source code of the software is made available to users indiscriminately.
Open system — A ticket controlling system without on-line connection on board of a train, where there is no possibility to detect if a ticket is used twice
Open wagon — A wagon with or without side boards and tailboards, the loading surfaces of which are open.
Operated system version — For both trackside and on-board, to operate a system version means to comply with the requirements from all TSI annex A documents, which are applicable to this system version and to the concerned subsystem. The operated system version is ordered by trackside; however, to operate a system version number X within a delimited trackside area only means that an on-board equipment running on this area shall behave according to the set of requirements applicable to the system version number X.Y where X is the one ordered by trackside and Y is the system version number Y (which may be different from the one ordered by trackside) operated by the on-board within this version X.
Operating  language — The language or languages used in daily operation an infrastructure manager and published in its Network Statement, for the communication of operational or safety related messages between the staff of the infrastructure manager and the railway undertaking.
Operating balances — The difference between what a country receives from and pays into the EU budget. There are many possible methods of calculating budgetary balances. In its Financial report, the Commission uses a method based on the same principles as the calculation of the correction of budgetary imbalances granted to the United Kingdom (the UK correction).
Operating days / days of operation — The calendar days on which a train service is expected to operate.
Operating Language — The language or languages used in daily operation an infrastructure manager and published in its Network Statement, for the communication of operational or safety related messages between the staff of the infrastructure manager and the railway undertaking.
Operation and traffic management — The procedures and related equipment permitting coherent operation of the various structural subsystems, during both normal and degraded operation, including in particular train composition and train driving, traffic planning and management. The professional qualifications which may be required for carrying out any type of railway service.
Operation of the railway infrastructure — Train path allocation, traffic management and infrastructure charging.
Operational  regime — Double  track  type
Operational decision — Decision concerning the manner in which a given activity is performed. An action or a given set of actions (risk control measures) studied within a decision-making process as a way of reaching a future risk situation (target) starting from
Operational digital platforms directly associated with transport and energy infrastructure — Physical and virtual information communication technology resources, operating via the communication infrastructure, which support the flow, storage, processing and analysis of transport or energy infrastructure data, or both.
Operational instruction — Formal information exchanged between signaller and train driver so as to ensure/continue railway operation in specific situations. The operational instruction exists at both national and European levels.
Operational maturity — Degree of fulfilment of the technical requirements (3.1.3.10) of a product or service EXAMPLE  1:Not existing, under development, ready to use, in use. EXAMPLE  2:Not fulfilling, partially fulfilling, fully fulfilling.
Operational personal data — All personal data processed by Union bodies, offices or agencies when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of Chapter 4 or Chapter 5 of Title V of Part Three TFEU to meet the objectives and tasks laid down in the legal acts establishing those bodies, offices or agencies.
Operational Point (OP) — Any location for train service operations, where train services may begin and end or change route and where passenger or freight services may be provided; it includes locations at boundaries between Member States or infrastructure managers.
Operational point at end of section of line — Unique  OP  ID  at  end  of  section  of  line (kilometres  increasing  from  start  OP  to the end OP)
Operational point at start of section of line — Unique  OP  ID  at  start  of  section  of  line (kilometres  increasing  from  start  OP  to the end OP).
Operational test scenario — A sequence of trackside and on-board events related to or influencing the Control-command and Signalling subsystems (e.g. sending/receiving messages, exceeding a speed limit, actions of operators) and the specified timing between them in order to test the intended railway system operation in situations relevant for ETCS, ATO and RMR (e.g. entry of a train into an equipped area, awakening of a train, overriding a signal at stop). The operational tests scenarios are based on the engineering rules adopted for the project.
Operator — The carrier operating a train for (part of) its route
Operator of a recharging point — The entity that is responsible for the management and operation of a recharging point and that provides a recharging service to end users, including in the name and on behalf of a mobility service provider.
Operator of a refuelling point — The entity that is responsible for the management and operation of a refuelling point and that provides a refuelling service to end users, including in the name and on behalf of a mobility service provider.
Operator of service facility — Any public or private entit. responsible for managing one or more service facilities or supplying one or more services to railway undertakings referred to in points 2 to 4 of Annex II.
OPET — Organisation for the Promotion of Energy Technologies
Opportunity costs — Costs which arise when a particular project restricts alternative uses of a scarce resource (e.g. land use for infrastructure precludes alternative uses such as recreation). The size of an opportunity cost is the value of a resource in its most productive alternative use.
Optical characteristics — Requirements concerning optical characteristics of the windscreen, e.g. angle between primary and secondary images, permissible optical distortions of vision, material haze, luminous transmittance and chromaticity.
Option — a reference risk situation.
Optional GSM-R functions — Use  of  optional  GSM-R  functions  which might   improve   operation   on   the   line. They are for information only and not for network access criteria.
ORBG — Other Reference Balise Group
ORD — On-board Recording Device
ORD — Open road
Ordinary material — Material which is neither retroreflecting nor fluorescent nor phosphorescent nor involves powered light emission nor is activated by a radioactive source.
Organisation code — A unique identifier, consisting of four alphanumeric characters that shall be assigned by the Agency to one organisation.
Organiser — A trader who combines and sells or offers for sale packages, either directly or through another trader or together with another trader, or the trader who transmits the traveller's data to another trader in accordance with point (b)(v) of point 2;
Orientation — Plane in which the exposed face of the specimen is located during testing, with either the vertical or horizontally face upwards.
OS — On Sight mode
OS — On Sight
OSCE — Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (replaced the CSCE from 1 January 1995)
OSHA — (See EU-OSHA)
OSI — Open systems interconnection
OSJD — Organisation for Cooperation between Railways
OSS — One Stop Shop
OT — Overseas territory
OTD — On time delivery index
Other accident — Any accident other than a collision of train with rail vehicle, collision of train with obstacle within the clearance gauge, derailment of train, level crossing accident, an accident to person involving rolling stock in motion or a fire in rolling stock.
Other Cant Deficiency train categories for which the ETCS trackside is configured to provide SSP — Essential   information   for   drivers   of   trains   with   a   worse (lower)  tolerated  cant  deficiency  than  those  for  which  the ETCS   trackside   provides   SSP   (Static   Speed   Profiles)   in conjunction  with  1.1.1.3.2.14. According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
Other crew members performing safety-critical tasks — Staff on board the train who are not train drivers but who help to ensure the safety of the train and of the passengers and goods being transported
Other ETCS requirements (related to existing not interoperable networks) — ETCS requirements related to pre-B2 on-board equipment, compatibility with existing lines where pre-B2 equipment is installed. Or ETCS optional functionalities that may have an impact on the safe movement of the train.
Other GSM-R requirements — Other requirements related to GSM-R disturbances, installation of filters, etc., which cannot be categorised under the former points.
Other health and safety requirements — Other requirements than those in the list of parameters for the parameter 9.2 ‘Health and safety’.
Other lines — All other lines than principal lines, including lines maintained for possible future use, but not operated.
Other person at a platform — Any person at a railway platform who is not defined as ‘passenger’, ‘employee or contractor’, ‘level crossing user’, ‘other person not at a platform’ or ‘trespasser’.
Other person not at a platform — Any person not at a railway platform who is not defined as ‘passenger’, ‘employee or contractor’, ‘level crossing user’, ‘other person at a platform’ or ‘trespasser’.
Other radio systems (Radio Legacy Systems) — Indication of radio legacy systems installed.
Other reference balise group — The ORBG is a balise group different from the LRBG, which is used as a common location reference between the ERTMS/ETCS on-board and trackside equipment.
Other requirements — A requirement, other than a technical specification, imposed on a product for the purpose of protecting, in particular, consumers or the environment, and which affects its life cycle after it has been placed on the market, such as conditions of use, recycling, reuse or disposal, where such conditions can significantly influence the composition or nature of the product or its marketing.
Other staff of the Commission (Eurostat) — The servants of the Communities, within the meaning of Articles 2 to 5 of the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Communities, working at the Community statistical authority.
Other tracks — All other tracks than main/running ones: •	tracks maintained, but not operated by the infrastructure manager; •	tracks at service facilities not used for running trains, including sidings. Tracks at service facilities not used for running trains are excluded. The boundary of the service facility is the point at which the railway vehicle leaving the service facility cannot pass without having an authorization to access the mainline or other similar line. This point is usually identified by a signal. Service facilities are passenger stations, their buildings and other facilities; freight terminals; marshalling yards and train formation facilities, including shunting facilities; storage sidings; maintenance facilities; other technical facilities, including cleaning and washing facilities; maritime and inland port facilities which are linked to rail activities; relief facilities; refuelling facilities and supply of fuel in these facilities.
Other train protection, control and warning systems for degraded situation — Indication of existence of other system than ETCS for degraded situation.
Others (third parties) — All persons not defined as ‘passengers’, ‘employees including the staff of contractors’, ‘level crossing users’ or ‘unauthorised persons on railway premises’.
OTIF — Organisation intergouvernementale pour les Transports Internationaux Ferroviaires
OTIF — Intergovernmental Organisation for International Carriage by Rail
OTIF — The Intergovernmental Organization for International Carriage by Rail (OTIF, Gryphenhübeliweg 30, CH-3006 Bern).
OTIF — Organisation intergouvernementale pour les Transports Internationaux Ferroviaires - Intergovernmental Organisation for International Carriage by Rail (http://www.otif.org)
OTIF — Organisation des Transports Internationaux Ferroviaires
OTM — On–Track Machine
Outer packaging — The outer protection of the composite or combination packaging together with any absorbent materials, cushioning and any other components necessary to contain and protect inner receptacles or inner packagings.
Output — The deliverables generated by the action determined in accordance with sector-specific rules.
Outsourced maintenance function — Refers to entities performing outsourced maintenance function or parts thereof as considered in Article 14(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 on railway safety.
Outsourced maintenance function, or parts thereof — Refers to entities performing outsourced maintenance function or parts thereof as considered in Article 14(3) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 on railway safety.
Outturn — The difference between income received and amounts paid, including adjustments for carryovers, cancellations and exchange rate differences. It can be positive (surplus), negative (deficit) or zero (perfect balance between revenue and expenditure).
Outward — In a return journey, the first half of the journey
Over-moulded cylinder — A cylinder intended for the carriage of LPG with a water capacity not exceeding 13 litres made of a coated welded steel inner cylinder shell with an over-moulded protective case made from cellular plastic, which is non-removable and bonded to the outer surface of the steel cylinder shell wall.
Over-Reading amount — The distance the train may have travelled less far than the estimated position. The distance is estimated by the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment taking into account the odometer inaccuracy plus the error for the detection of a balise location, as defined in the Eurobalise specifications.
Overhaul — Comprehensive set of preventive maintenance (3.1.2.15) actions carried out, in order to maintain the required level of performance of an item. Note 1 to entry: Overhaul may be performed at prescribed intervals of time or number of operations. Note 2 to entry: Overhaul may require a complete or partial dismantling of the item.
Overhead contact line (OCL) — Contact line placed above (or beside) the upper limit of the vehicle gauge and supplying vehicles with electric energy through roof-mounted current collection equipment
Overhead power line / overhead line equipment — An overhead power line is an electric power transmission line suspended to towers or poles. Overhead line equipment includes the wires and associated equipment (fittings, insulators and other attachments), suspended over or adjacent to the railway line, for supplying electricity to electric trains.
Overlap — The section of line in advance of a stop signal that must be unoccupied and, where necessary, locked before and during a signalled running movement to the rear of the signal to avoid an accident if the train brakes do not perform as well as expected and the train passes the END OF MOVEMENT AUTHORITY.
Overlapping section — The layout of the corridor lines leads to situations where some corridor lines overlap with others.
Overpack — An enclosure used (by a single consignor in the case of radioactive material) to contain one or more packages, consolidated into a single unit easier to handle and stow during carriage. Examples of overpacks: (a) a loading tray such as a pallet, on which several packages are placed or stacked and secured by a plastics strip, shrink or stretch wrapping or other appropriate means; or (b) an outer protective packaging such as a box or a crate.
OVERPANAMAX/ POST PANAMAX — Ship with at least one dimension greater than Panamax.
Overpressure generation — A rapidly propagating pressure or shock-wave in atmosphere with high pressure, high density and high velocity.
Override EOA speed — Maximum speed when the override EOA function is active.
OVIDE — Videotex for Members of the European Parliament
Own resources — The revenue flowing automatically to the European Union budget, pursuant to the Treaties and implementing legislation, without the need for any subsequent decision by national authorities.  • Traditional own resources  • Own resources based on value added tax (VAT) • Own resources based on GNI
OWW — Open waterways
Oxygen consumption principle — Proportional relationship between the mass of oxygen consumed during combustion and the heat released.
P — Passenger train braking mode
P — Permitted speed supervision limit
P — Brake type – P = passenger
P — Probability or conditional probability
P1 — Conditional probability to involve a DG transport unit in a transport event
PA — Panama
Package — The complete product of the packing operation, consisting of the packaging or large packaging or IBC and its contents prepared for dispatch. The term includes pressure receptacles for gases as defined in this section as well as articles which, because of their size, mass or configuration may be carried unpackaged or carried in cradles, crates or handling devices. Except for the carriage of radioactive material, the term does not apply to goods which are carried in bulk, nor to substances carried in tanks. NOTE: For radioactive material, see 2.2.7.2, 4.1.9.1.1 and Chapter 6.4.
Package — Package means the complete product of the packing operation, consisting of the packaging or large packaging or IBC and its contents prepared for dispatch.
Package — A combination of at least two different types of travel services for the purpose of the same trip or holiday, if: (a) those services are combined by one trader, including at the request of or in accordance with the selection of the traveller, before a single contract on all services is concluded; or (b) irrespective of whether separate contracts are concluded with individual travel service providers, those services are:        (i) purchased from a single point of sale and those services have been selected before the traveller agrees to pay,        (ii) offered, sold or charged at an inclusive or total price,        (iii) advertised or sold under the term ‘package’ or under a similar term,        (iv) combined after the conclusion of a contract by which a trader entitles the traveller to choose among a selection of different types of travel services, or        (v) purchased from separate traders through linked online booking   processes where the traveller's name, payment details and e-mail address are transmitted from the trader with whom the first contract is concluded to another trader or traders and a contract with the latter trader or traders is concluded at the latest 24 hours after the confirmation of the booking of the first travel service.        A combination of travel services where not more than one type of travel service as referred to in point (a), (b) or (c) of point 1 is combined with one or more tourist services as referred to in point (d) of point 1 is not a package if the latter services.       (a) do not account for a significant proportion of the value of the combination and are not advertised as and do not otherwise represent an essential feature of the combination; or       (b) are selected and purchased only after the performance of a travel service as referred to in point (a), (b) or (c) of point 1 has started;
Package travel contract — A contract on the package as a whole or, if the package is provided under separate contracts, all contracts covering travel services included in the package;
Packaging — One or more receptacles and any other components or materials necessary for the receptacles to perform their containment and other safety functions (see also "Combination packaging", "Composite packaging", "Inner packaging", "Intermediate bulk container (IBC)", "Intermediate packaging", "Large packaging", "Light-gauge metal packaging", "Outer packaging", "Reconditioned packaging", "Remanufactured packaging", "Reused packaging", "Salvage packaging" and "Sift-proof packaging").
Packer — Any enterprise which puts dangerous goods into packagings, including large packagings and intermediate bulk containers (IBCs) and, where necessary, prepares packages for carriage.
Packet — Packets are multiple variables grouped into a single unit with a defined internal structure. Packets are part of telegrams and messages.
Packing group — A group to which, for packing purposes, certain substances may be assigned in accordance with their degree of danger. The packing groups have the following meanings which are explained more fully in Part 2: Packing group I: Substances presenting high danger; Packing group II: Substances presenting medium danger; and Packing group III: Substances presenting low danger. NOTE: Certain articles containing dangerous goods are assigned to a packing group.
Padded storage — Storage tanks working at ambient temperature and at a pressure above 1 bar (the pressure is exerted by a pad of inert gas) and containing a substance in a liquid state.
Pallet — Raised platform, intended to facilitate the lifting and stacking of goods. While pallets are usually made of wood, they can be made of other materials. They are of standard dimensions, which vary between regions. One common dimension in Europe and Asia is 1 000 mm x 1 200 mm (ISO) and 800 mm x 1 200 mm (CEN).
Pallet — A raised platform, normally made of wood, facilitating the handling of goods. Pallets are of standard dimensions. The most used in Europe are 1000 mm x 1200 mm (ISO) and 800 mm x 1200 mm (CEN).
PANAMAX — Ship with dimensions that allow it to pass through the Panama canal: maximum length 295 m, maximum beam overall 32.25 m, maximum draught 13.50 m.
Pantograph — Device for transmitting power from the overhead catenary to the train.
Pantograph contact force (including static contact force, dynamic behaviour and aerodynamic effects) — Including quality of current collection.
Pantograph functional and design parameters — Parameter without explanation in the document
Pantograph head geometry — Parameter without explanation in the document
Pantograph lowering — Parameter without explanation in the document
Pantograph overall design — Parameter without explanation in the document
PAO — FR: production/publication assistée par ordinateur
Parameter — Individual element of a formula to which a name, a definition and a value are allocated.
Pareto efficiency (=P. optimality) — State of equilibrium in which no one’s welfare can be further improved without decreasing someone else’s (after V.F.D. Pareto, 1848-1923).
Parking brake — Requirements concerning the brake force production of parking brakes, necessary energy supply to operate it (setting/releasing).
Parking brake — Is a brake used to prevent parked rolling stock moving under the specified conditions taking into account the place, wind, gradient and rolling stock loading state, until intentionally released.
Parking brake — Brake used to prevent a stationary train from moving under specified conditions, until intentionally released (also called ‘immobilization braking’)
Parking brake performance — Requirements concerning the parking braking performance, e.g. load condition, ruling track gradient.
Parking braking command — Requirements concerning the parking braking command, e.g. conditions in which the parking braking command has to be able to apply and/or release the parking brake.
Part of a Railway Freight Corridor — Indication  whether  the  line  is  designated to a Railway Freight Corridor
Partial supervision modes — A defined set of ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment modes used where insufficient track data is available to allow full supervision. The set of partially supervised modes are as follows : -    limited supervision -    unfitted mode -    on sight mode -    staff responsible mode -    shunting -    post trip mode -    reversing
Participant — A candidate or tenderer in a procurement procedure, an applicant in a grant award procedure, an expert in a procedure for selection of experts, an applicant in a contest for prizes or a person or entity participating in a procedure for implementing Union funds pursuant to point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1).
Partner — A commercial entity with which another commercial entity has some form of alliance. This relationship may be a contractual, exclusive bond in which both entities commit not to ally with third parties.
Partnership — An arrangement where parties, known as partners, agree to cooperate to advance their mutual interests.
Pass-by noise impact — Pass-by noise impact caused by the vehicle upon the environment external to the railway system.
Passage — Any route, other than a road, provided for the passage of people, animals, vehicles or machinery.
Passenger — Person (other than an employee with specific duties on the train) travelling by train or on railway property before or after a train journey.
Passenger — A person who intends to make, or is making, or has made a journey using the transport services and other services of one or more railway undertakings. May be different from customer (see customer)
Passenger — Any person, excluding a member of the train crew, who makes a trip by rail, including a passenger trying to embark onto or disembark from a moving train for accident statistics only.
Passenger — A person who intends to make, or is making, or has made a journey using the transport services and other services of one or more railway undertakings May be different from customer (see customer) (from the TAP glossary)
Passenger — A person who intends to make, or is making, or has made a journey using the transport services and other services of one or more railway undertakings May be different from customer (see customer)
Passenger alarm — Requirements concerning passenger alarm, e.g. availability of alarm activation devices (location, number), functionality, how to reset, communication link from the passenger to the driver/staff, activation of emergency brake, emergency brake override.
Passenger area — Area to which passengers have access without particular authorisation.
Passenger car — It is a road motor vehicle, other than a moped or a motor cycle, intended for the carriage of passengers and designed to seat no more than nine persons (including the driver). The term passenger car also covers microcars (small cars which, depending on individual Member State legislation, may need no permit to be driven and/ or benefit from lower vehicle taxation), taxis and other hired passenger cars, provided that they have fewer than 10 seats in total. This category may also includes vans designed and used primarily for transport of passengers, as well as ambulances and motor homes. Excluded are light goods road vehicles, as well as motor coaches and buses and mini-buses/mini-coaches.
Passenger carrying capacity: seats and berths — The number of seats and/or berths available in a passenger vehicle when performing the service for which it is intended. Seats in dining coaches and buffet compartment places are excluded.
Passenger carrying capacity: standing places — The number of authorised standing places available in a passenger vehicle when performing the service for which it is intended.
Passenger evacuation concept — Requirements regarding availability and design of passenger emergency exits and their indication, limitation on passengers per vehicle.
Passenger information — Parameter without explanation in the document
Passenger railway vehicle — Railway vehicle for the conveyance of passengers, even if it comprises one or more compartments with spaces specially reserved for luggage, parcels, mail, etc. These vehicles include special vehicles such as sleeping cars, saloon cars, dining cars, ambulance cars and vans carrying accompanied road passenger vehicles. Each separate vehicle of an indivisible set for the conveyance of passengers is counted as a passenger railway vehicle. Included are railcars if they are designed for passenger transport.
Passenger service — In the context of Network Statements: a train carrying passengers that is either in regular service or that has been requested for future operation on a regular basis. Under REGULATION (EC) No 1370/2007, Article 2, "(a) ‘public passenger transport’ means passenger transport services of general economic interest provided to the public on a non-discriminatory and continuous basis". Typical rail passenger market segments are urban (including metros, trams, and light rail systems), commuter (or suburban) services and intercity, which includes conventional and high-speed trains.
Passenger station — Train station for passenger traffic, equipped with specific facilities for the access of the passengers and providing related services.
Passenger train — Operational formation accessible to passengers (a train composed of passenger vehicles but not accessible to passengers is not considered as a passenger train).
Passenger train-km — The unit of measure representing the movement of a passenger train over one kilometre; only the distance on the national territory of the reporting country shall be taken into account.
Passenger type — A code, and the corresponding definition, identifying the characteristics of one or more rail passengers (e.g. Adult, Senior, Family group). Valid values are listed in ERA Code list B.4.5261
Passenger type — A categorisation of the subjects that can benefit of the transport service (normally a type of person, but there are codes also to indicate a dog or a bicycle, see code list B.4.5261 - Name: Charge unit code)
Passenger type — Categorisation of passengers defined in code list B.4.5261
Passenger-kilometre — A passenger-kilometre, abbreviated as pkm, is the unit of measurement representing the transport of one passenger by a defined mode of transport (road, rail, air, sea, inland waterways etc.) over one kilometre.
Passenger-km — The unit of measure representing the transport of one passenger by rail over a distance of one kilometre. Only the distance on the national territory of the reporting country shall be taken into account.
Passenger-related items — Parameter without explanation in the document
Passing Point — A Timing Point defined in the Segment Profile, where the train is planned to pass within a given time window defined in the Journey Profile.
Passive level crossing — A level crossing without any form of warning system or protection activated when it is unsafe for the user to traverse the crossing.
Passive level crossing — A level crossing without any form of warning system or protection activated when it is unsafe for the user to traverse the crossing. Sometimes also referred to as passive grade crossing.
Passive provision — Provision for the future construction of a physical extension to a structure (for example: increased platform length).
Passive safety — Requirements concerning passive safety of the vehicle in collision with obstacles (e.g. crashworthiness etc.). Including, e.g. obstacle deflector, limiting deceleration, survival space and structural integrity of occupied areas, reducing the risk of derailment and overriding, limiting consequences of hitting a track obstruction, interior fittings for passive safety. Reference to collision scenarios, survival space and structural integrity of the occupied areas, reducing the risk of overriding and derailment, limiting the consequences of hitting a track obstruction. Requirements concerning rail guard for protection of wheels from foreign objects and obstacles on the rails. Refers to: height of the lower end of the rail guard above the plain rail, minimum longitudinal force without permanent deformation. Deals not with snow plough.
Path — The infrastructure capacity needed to run a train between two places over a given time-period (Route defined in time and space).
Path — The infrastructure capacity needed to run a train between two places over a given time-period (route defined in time and space)
Path alteration — Based on the contracts of use of the infrastructure/path agreements, applicants can expect that an allocated path is available up to its operation. However, in several cases, it may be necessary for infrastructure managers and allocation bodies (Hereafter IMs) to alternate, adjust, replace1 or withdraw already allocated paths. This activity is the so-called “Alteration of an Allocated Path” (or short “Path Alteration”). However, the need for path alteration shall be reduced to a minimum. This subject has been tackled in the project “Timetable and Capacity Redesign” (TTR). A path alteration may refer to one single running day, several days or all remaining days in a yearly timetable; It is also possible to alter the whole path section or just a part of it. It applies to paths in a yearly timetable and to those booked using the short-term planning process as well.
Path assembly — Joining up of individual train paths to extend path in terms of time and space.
Path Coordination System — An international path request coordination system for Path Applicants, e.g. Railway Undertakings (RUs), Infrastructure Managers (IMs,) Allocation Bodies (ABs) and Rail Freight Corridors (RFCs). The internet-based application optimises international path coordination by ensuring that path requests and offers are harmonised by all involved parties.
Path feasibility study / path study — A feasibility study carried out by Infrastructure Managers concerning a potential path request. The purpose of a path study is to launch detailed discussions between the Applicant and the involved Infrastructure Managers. A path study generally helps to prepare and facilitate the implementation of a new operational concept or a request for a major change of the existing production concept.
Path modification — The process by which applicants may request a modification of allocated paths from infrastructure managers and allocation bodies.
Path number — The number of the defined train path
Payment — The transfer of wealth from one party (such as a customer) to another (such as a distributor). A payment is usually made in exchange for the provision of transport or service
Payment — A cash disbursement to honour legal obligations
Payment appropriations — Appropriations covering expenditure due in the current year, arising from legal commitments entered in the current year and/or earlier years
Payment claim — Payment application submitted by a Member State, which constitutes the grounds for an interim payment reimbursing the corresponding EU contribution to the expenditure incurred on the ground.
Payment service — A ‘payment service’ as defined in Article 4, point (3), of Directive (EU) 2015/2366: (‘payment service’ means any business activity set out in Annex I: 1. Services enabling cash to be placed on a payment account as well as all the operations required for operating a payment account. 2. Services enabling cash withdrawals from a payment account as well as all the operations required for operating a payment account. 3. Execution of payment transactions, including transfers of funds on a payment account with the user’s payment service provider or with another payment service provider:     (a) execution of direct debits, including one-off direct debits;     (b) execution of payment transactions through a payment card or a similar device;     (c) execution of credit transfers, including standing orders. 4.Execution of payment transactions where the funds are covered by a credit line for a payment service user:    (a) execution of direct debits, including one-off direct debits;    (b) execution of payment transactions through a payment card or a similar device;    (c) execution of credit transfers, including standing orders.  5. Issuing of payment instruments and/or acquiring of payment transactions.  6. Money remittance.  7. Payment initiation services. 8. Account information services.)
PBD SR — Permitted Braking Distance Speed Restriction
PC — Personal computer
PDIU — Platform Door Interface Unit
PDO — Protected designation of origin
PE — Peru
Peak sound pressure (ppeak) — Maximum value of the ‘C’-frequency weighted instantaneous noise pressure.
Pecuniary externality — External effect that is actively and voluntarily processed through markets and thus need not be addressed by government action.
PED — Platform Edge Doors
Peer evaluation — A process for the assessment of a national accreditation body by other national accreditation bodies, carried out in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation, and, where applicable, additional sectoral technical specifications.
Peer-to-Peer — Refers to a class of systems and applications that employ distributed resources to perform a critical function in a decentralised manner. The resources encompass computing power, data (storage and content), network bandwidth, and presence (computers, human, and other resources). The critical function can be distributed computing, data/content sharing, communication and collaboration, or platform services. Decentralisation may apply to algorithms, data, and metadata, or to all of them. This does not preclude retaining centralisation in some parts of the systems and applications if it meets their requirements.
Peer-to-Peer — A class of systems and applications that employ distributed resources to perform a critical function in a decentralised manner
People killed in road accidents — It is defined as the number of deaths caused by road accidents and which occur within 30 days from the date of the accident. The number includes drivers and passengers, in motorised vehicles and on bicycles, as well as pedestrians involved in road accidents.
Performance indicator (PI) — Indicator measuring the effective and/or efficient operation and control of a process but that is not limited to processes. Note 1 to entry: A performance indicator can be related to a single process or to multiple processes or any activity.
Performance monitoring — The systematic observation and recording of the performance of the train service and the infrastructure for the purpose of bringing about improvements in the performance of both.
Performance Parameter — Parameter describing a TSI Category of Line used as the basis for the design of infrastructure subsystem elements and as the indication of the performance level of a line.
Performance requirement — Requirement that specifies the result that a product or a service reaches. Note 1 to entry: See Annex B. EXAMPLE:Maximum speed, maximum acceleration.
Performance scheme — Part of the infrastructure charging scheme which is aimed at encouraging railway undertakings and infrastructure managers to minimise disruption and improve the performance of the railway network. It may include penalties for actions which disrupt the operation of the network, compensation for undertakings which suffer from disruption and bonuses that reward better than planned performance.
Permission for charging electric energy storage for traction purposes at standstill — Point  at  which  IM  authorises  charging  of  electric  energy storage  for  traction  purposes  at  standstill
Permission for regenerative braking — Indication whether regenerative braking is permitted,   not   permitted,   or   permitted under specific conditions.
Permissive signal — A signal aspect or a signal identification, which enables a main signal to be passed at danger under special conditions, without specific permission from the signalman.
Permit of use of reflective plates — Sections where is permitted to use the reflective plates on rail freight   corridors,   with   a   view   to   prioritise   the   current bottlenecks.    Specific    case    for    Belgium,    France,    Italy, Portugal  and  Spain  until  1.1.2026
Permit-granting procedure — Any procedure that has to be followed related to an individual project falling within the scope of this Directive in order to obtain the authorising decision as required by the authority or authorities of a Member State, under Union or national law, with the exception of urban or land use planning, of procedures related to the award of public procurements, and of steps undertaken at strategic level that do not refer to a specific project, such as strategic environmental assessment, public budgetary planning, as well as national or regional transport plans.
Permitted conditions for charging electric energy storage for traction purposes at standstill — Conditions  set  by  IMs  according  to  a  standardised  document
Permitted contact strip material — Indication  of  which  contact  strip  mate rials are permitted to be used.
Permitted speed — Maximum speed at which a train can run without ETCS warning and/or brake intervention.
Permitted speed — The speed limit at which a train is allowed to proceed without ERTMS/ETCS warning and / or intervention.
Permitted speed — Maximum speed at which a train / shunting movement can run without ETCS warning and / or brake intervention.
Person identification data — A set of data enabling the identity of a natural or legal person, or a natural person representing a legal person to be established.
Person injured — Any person who as result of an accident was not killed immediately or not dying within 30 days, but sustained an injury, normally needing medical treatment, excluding attempted suicides. Injuries include cases such as, but not limited to, a cut, fracture, sprain, or amputation. Persons with lesser wounds, such as minor cuts and bruises are not normally recorded as injured. An injured person is excluded if the competent authority declares the cause of the injury to be attempted suicide by that person, i.e. a deliberate act to injure oneself resulting in injury, but not in death.
Person killed — Any person dying immediately or within 30 days as a result of an injury accident, excluding suicides. It includes passengers, employees and other specified or unspecified persons involved in a rail injury accident. A killed person is excluded if the competent authority declares the cause of death to be suicide, i.e. a deliberate act to injure oneself resulting in death. For countries that do not apply the threshold of 30 days, conversion coefficients are estimated so that comparisons on the basis of the 30 day-definition can be made.
Person seriously injured — Any person injured who was hospitalised for more than 24 hours as a result of an accident, excluding attempted suicides.
Person slightly injured — Any person injured normally needing medical treatment, excluding attempted suicides, not classified as seriously injured. Persons with lesser wounds, such as minor cuts and bruises are not normally recorded as injured.
Person with disabilities and person with reduced mobility — Any person who has a permanent or temporary physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with various barriers, may hinder their full and effective use of transport on an equal basis with other passengers or whose mobility when using transport is reduced due to age.
Person with disabilities and person with reduced mobility — Include any person who has a permanent or temporary physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with various barriers, may hinder the full and effective use by that person of transport on an equal basis with other passengers or whose mobility when using transport is reduced due to age.
Person with disabilities and person with reduced mobility — Any person who has a permanent or temporary physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with various barriers, may hinder his or her full and effective use of transport on an equal basis with other passengers or whose mobility when using transport is reduced due to age.
Person with reduced mobility (PRM) — Any person whose mobility when using transport is reduced due to any physical disability (sensory or locomotory, permanent or temporary), intellectual disability or impairment, or any other cause of disability, or as a result of age, and whose situation needs appropriate attention and adaptation to its particular needs of the service made available to all passengers
Personal data — The same meaning as in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001, and in particular Article 2 thereof.
Personal data — Any information relating to an identified or identifiable natural person (‘data subject’); an identifiable natural person is one who can be identified, directly or indirectly, in particular by reference to an identifier such as a name, an identification number, location data, an online identifier or to one or more factors specific to the physical, physiological, genetic, mental, economic, cultural or social identity of that natural person.
Personal data breach — A breach of security leading to the accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or access to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise processed.
Personal data filing system — The same meaning as in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001, and in particular Article 2 thereof.
PF — French Polynesia
PG — Platform Gates
PG — Papua New Guinea
PGI — Protected geographical indication
PH — Philippines (the)
Phare — Programme of aid to central and east European countries
Phase One (TAP -) — The first phase of TAP TSI implementation, consisting of definition of detailed IT specifications, governance and master plan
Phase separation — Indication  of  existence  of  phase  separa tion and required information.
PhD — Doctor of Philosophy
Phosphorescent material — Material incorporating phosphors that, if excited by UV or visible radiation, store energy, which is emitted as light over a period of time.
Phrase — Functional unit of application data
PI — Performance indicator
Pick-up — See Passenger car
Piggyback — It does not refer to combined transport in general but specifically to the transport by rail of road semi-trailers.
Piggyback transport — The carriage of road vehicles in combined road/rail transport. This definition also includes the rolling road (loading of road vehicles (accompanied or unaccompanied) onto wagons designed for this type of transport).
Piggyback transport — Transport of road vehicles by rail. The term was originally for transport of semi-trailers by rail but is also now applied to the transport of road vehicles in general.
PIM — See Planning IM
PINC — Community’s illustrative nuclear programme
Pipe network (pipe) — Piping linking different units of the plant is considered as "pipe network (pipes)" (for example, a pipe linking an unloading unit and a storage unit, or linking a storage unit and a process unit), as well as pipes feeding the flare. Piping staying inside a unit (for example, inside a storage farm, or between two process equipment of the same process unit) is not considered as "pipe". They are integral part of the equipment to which they are linked.
PIS — Passenger Information System
PK — Pakistan
PKI — Public key infrastructure
PKI — Public Key Infrastructure
Pkm — Passenger -kilometre
pkm — Passenger-kilometre
PKP — Polskie Linie Kolejowe – Polish Railways
PL — Poland
pl — Polish
Place of delivery — Place where the delivery happens (departure rail station to be given). A place where responsibility for the wagon is changed.
Place of departure — Place from which a means of transport is scheduled to depart or has departed.
Place of destination — Place at which the means of transport is due to arrive or has arrived. Synonym: Place of arrival
Place of disembarkation — The place in which a railway passenger leaves the railway vehicle after being conveyed by it. A passenger transfer from one railway vehicle directly to another one, regardless of the railway transport operator, is not regarded as disembarkation/embarkation. Whenever during the transfer another mode of transport is used, this is to be regarded as disembarkation from a railway vehicle followed by a subsequent embarkation on a railway vehicle
Place of embarkation — The place in which a railway passenger boards the railway vehicle to be conveyed by it. A passenger transfer from one railway vehicle directly to another one, regardless of the railway transport operator, is not regarded as disembarkation/embarkation. Whenever during the transfer another mode of transport is used, this is to be regarded as disembarkation from a railway vehicle followed by a subsequent embarkation on a railway vehicle.
Place of loading — The place taken into account is the place in which the goods are loaded on a railway vehicle to be transported by it. Unlike in road and inland waterway transport, transhipments from one railway vehicle directly to another and change of tractive vehicle are not regarded as unloading/loading. However, if the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle, loaded on another mode of transport and, again loaded on another railway vehicle, this is considered as unloading from the first railway vehicle followed by loading on the second railway vehicle.
Place of unloading — The place taken into account is the place in which the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle after being transported by it. Unlike in road and inland waterway transport, transhipments from one railway vehicle directly to another and change of tractive vehicle are not regarded as unloading/loading. However, if the goods are unloaded from a railway vehicle, loaded on another mode of transport and, again loaded on another railway vehicle, this is considered as unloading from the first railway vehicle followed by loading on the second railway vehicle.
Placing in service — All the operations by which a subsystem or a vehicle is put into its design operating state.
Placing in service — All the operations by which a subsystem is put into its operational service (Article 2(19) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Placing in service — All the operations by which a subsystem is put into its operational service.
Placing in service — All  the  operations  by  which  a  subsystem  is  put  into  its  operational  service (Article 2(19) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Placing on the market — The first making available of an interoperability constituent on the Union market.
Placing on the market — First making available on the Union’s market of an interoperability constituent, subsystem or vehicle ready to function in its design operating state (Article 2(35) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Placing on the market — The first making available of a product on the Community market.
Placing on the market — The first making available on the Union's market of an interoperability constituent, subsystem or vehicle ready to function in its design operating state.
Placing on the market — The first making available of radio equipment on the Union market.
Plain line — Section of track without switches and crossings.
Planning IM — The Planning IM (PIM) is the Infrastructure Manager who is responsible for elaboration and allocation of a path. The responsibility area of PIM is defined by handover points e.g. used as first/last journey location in Path Information of Path Request Message or of an offered/booked path. In most cases, the RIM will be the same entity as the Planning IM. However, for some locations and/or some trains, path elaboration and also traffic monitoring in operations may also be delegated to another IM.
Platform — The area at a station to alight from/board trains
Platform — The surface next to a track along which one or more trains is intended to remain stationary in normal operating conditions to allow passengers to board and alight from the train, making appropriate allowance for stopping tolerances. A platform can have tracks on one or both sides.
Platform — A flat area where passengers wait for their train, can board their train at the beginning of their journey, and leave their train when they arrive. For goods, this area is usually known as a 'dock'.
Platform — Fixed structure along the railway track used for the boarding/alighting and loading/unloading of trains.
Platform Barrier System — The system that keeps passengers at a safe distance from the platform edge, outside of boarding times.
plc — Public limited company
PLO — Palestine Liberation Organisation
Plug-in hybrid vehicle — An electric vehicle with a conventional combustion engine combined with an electric propulsion system which can be recharged from an external electric power source.
PM — Particulate matter
PM — Saint Pierre and Miquelon
PME — FR: petite et moyenne entreprise (see SME)
PN — Pitcairn
Pocket wagon — A rail wagon with a recessed pocket to accept the axle/wheel assembly of a semitrailer.
Point — A section of track equipped so that train routes may converge or diverge.
Point of sale — Any retail premises, whether movable or immovable, or a retail website or similar online sales facility, including where retail websites or online sales facilities are presented to travellers as a single facility, including a telephone service;
Point retraction — The reference line in a fixed common crossing can deviate from the theoretical reference line. From a certain distance to the crossing point, the reference line of the vee can, depending on the design, be retracted from this theoretical line away from the wheel flange in order to avoid contact between both elements. This situation is described in Figure 2 in Commission Regulation (EU) No 1299/2014.
Poka yoke — Prevention method designed as a simple technique to prevent either anyone from making unplanned or unwanted changes to a system, or any errors from negatively impacting on a system.
Policy and Management Committee (PMC) — EIM body, consisting of at least one delegate from every EIM member. The PMC shall be the normal mechanism through which member companies exercise day-to-day influence in the activities and statements of EIM.
Polluter pays principle — Political/economic principle stating that polluters should pay the full environmental costs of an activity. Some experts extend the principle to state that users that should pay the full social costs of an activity, but this is not universally accepted.
Pool fire — The combustion of material evaporating from a flammable liquid surface (pool).
Poolfire — The combustion of material evaporating from a layer of liquid (a pool). The occurrence of the layer of liquid results from the failure of equipment containing a flammable liquid.
Port — It is a place having facilities for merchant ships to moor and to load or unload cargo or to disembark or embark passengers to or from vessels, usually directly to a pier.
Portable tank — A multimodal tank having, when used for the carriage of gases as defined in 2.2.2.1.1, a capacity of more than 450 litres in accordance with the definitions in Chapter 6.7 or the IMDG Code and indicated by a portable tank instruction (T-Code) in Column (10) of Table A of Chapter 3.2.
POS — Point of Sale
Possession (or restriction of use) — Non-availability of part of the rail network for full use by trains during a period reserved for the carrying out of works. This can be due to the disconnection or restriction of use of signalling equipment to enable work to be carried out on the equipment. Possession is an operational arrangement that prohibits scheduled train movements, marshalling or shunting activities on the track. Possession can be planned or unplanned.
Possession, of signalling equipment — The disconnection or restriction of use of signalling equipment agreed between maintenance and operations staff to enable work to be carried out on the equipment.
Post trip mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that is entered after a train trip when the train has been brought to a stand and the driver has acknowledged the situation.
Post-processing — The timetabling phase following the consultation phase in which Infrastructure Managers, Allocation Bodies and C-OSS can further elaborate the draft timetable offer, based on the observations placed by the contracted applicant(s). This phase concludes with the final offer.
Power head — Driving motor car with power collection and/or generation equipment Note 1 to entry: A power head typically does not carry payload.
Power output — The theoretical maximum power, expressed in kW, that a recharging point, station or pool, or a shore-side electricity supply installation can provide to vehicles or vessels connected to that recharging point, station, pool or installation.
Power Unit / power car / power head — Traction in a train can also be provided by a powered vehicle with or without driving cab, which is not intended to be uncoupled during normal operation. Such a vehicle is called a Power Unit (or power car) in general or a Power Head when located at one end of the trainset and fitted with a driving cab.
PPP — 1. Purchasing power parity 2. ‘Polluter pays’ principle
PPS — Purchasing power standard
PPV/PPW — Russian abbreviation for Prawila Polzowaniia Wagonami w mejdunarodnom soobqenii = Rules for use of railway vehicles in international traffic
PR — Puerto Rico
Practices — Ways of performing risk estimations and risk management by stakeholders. The Inland risk management framework describes a harmonised approach to current practices.
Pre-arranged path (PaP) — On Rail Freight Corridors, a pre-constructed path offered either on a whole Corridor or Corridor section. A Corridor Pre-arranged Path is a path set up by the IMs in the Corridors and given to the Corridor OSSs for allocation purposes. The path is protected for the use of the Corridor OSS. The number of Corridor pre-arranged paths is based on the requirement of REGULATION 913/2010. Both paths on cross-border sections and paths on national sections can form the offer for Corridor paths
Pre-booking — On behalf of the IM's, after the conflict solving, the C-OSS pre-books the requested PaP to the applicant.
Pre-constructed path product — Any kind of Pre-constructed path, e.g. a path constructed in advance of any path request and offerd by IM’s/AB’s; applicant can then select a product and submit a path request. Pre-constructed path products are either pre-arranged paths (PaP) on Rail Freight Corridors or catalogue path (CP) for all other purposes.
Pre-departure Period — Is the delta time before the scheduled time of departure. The pre-departure period starts at scheduled time of departure minus delta time and ends at the scheduled time of departure.
Pre-engagement — A procedural stage preceding the submission of an application for authorisation performed upon request of the applicant.
Pre-engagement — A procedural stage preceding the submission of an application, in the course of which the applicant may request additional information on the following stages of the safety assessment process from the safety certification body and the national safety authorities concerned with the intended area of operation.
Pre-engagement — A procedural stage preceding the submission of an application, in the course of which the applicant may request additional information on the following stages of the safety assessment process from the national safety authority
Pre-engagement baseline — The opinion of the authorising entity and of the concerned NSAs for the area of use on the pre-engagement file.
Predefined formation(s) — Train formation(s) of several units coupled together, which is defined at design stage and can be reconfigured during operation.
Preservation — All technical processes and operations which make it possible to keep records over time, to maintain their integrity and authenticity and to guarantee access to their content.
Pressure drum — A welded pressure receptacle of a water capacity exceeding 150 litres and of not more than 1 000 litres, (e.g. cylindrical receptacles equipped with rolling hoops, spheres on skids).
Pressure receptacle — A trasportable receptacle intended for holding substances under pressure included its closure(s) and other service equipment and is a collective term that includes cylinders, tubes, pressure drums, closed cryogenic receptacles, metal hydride storage systems, bundles of cylinders and salvage pressure receptacles.
Pressure receptacle shell — A cylinder, a tube, a pressure drum or a selvage pressure receptacle wothout its closures or other service requipment, but including any permanently attached device(s) (e.g. neck romg, foot ring). NOTE: The terms ``cylinder shell`, ``pressure drun shell`` and ``tube shell`` are also used.
Pressure storage — Storage tanks working at ambient temperature and at a pressure above 1 bar (pressure exerted by the substance, eventually with an inert gas). The substance stored can be a liquefied gas under pressure (two phase equilibrium) or a gas under pressure (one phase).
Pressure transport equipment — Transport equipment working at ambient temperature and at a pressure above 1 bar (pressure exerted by the substance, eventually with an inert gas). The substance stored can be a liquefied gas under pressure (two phase equilibrium) or a gas under pressure (one phase).
Pressure vessel systems/pressure equipment — Parameter without explanation in the document
Pressurized gas cartridge — See "Aerosol or aerosol dispenser"
Prevention — The approach of using risk reduction measures to seek to prevent the occurrence of a given event.  Within this framework prevention covers actions aiming at preventing the occurrence of dangerous goods events.
Prevention cost approach — Technique for estimating externalities whereby the costs of preventing damage are used as a proxy for the cost of the damage itself for society.
Preventive maintenance — Maintenance (3.1.2.12) carried out to mitigate degradation and reduce the probability of failure.
Previous User — An RU that used a wagon of which it was not the keeper, having subsequently handed it over to another  RU for use.
Price — Synonym of Fare
Price — See Fare
Pricing — The general approach adopted by a carrier when defining the prices for its services
Primary data — Basic data as reference data input for messages or as the basis for functionality and calculation of derived data.
Primary data — The basic data as reference data input for messages or as the basis for functionality and calculation of derived data
Principal — A person for whom another acts as an agent. In the definition, a person means either a physical or legal person or a company.
Principal line / route — Routes on an RFC where PaP's are offered
Principal railway lines — Railway lines maintained and operated for running trains. The cumulative length of the principal railway lines within the territory of a country corresponds to its railway network.
Priority rules — A rule that allows a user to be given preference over other users in case of conflicting requests. On a railway line, priority is the right for one type of traffic to proceed before another type of traffic.
Private key — One of the asymmetric keys (see)
Private siding — Track or set of tracks which are not managed by the infrastructure manager but are linked up with the track of an infrastructure manager so that: a) Railway transport operators or supportive functions can perform necessary activities b) Industrial, commercial or port, etc. establishment or group of establishments can be served by rail without transhipment.
Private siding — Direct rail connection to a company.
Private sidings — Privately operated pieces of rail infrastructure, connecting loading facilities (normally industry and other manufacturing sites) to the public rail network.
Privately-owned wagon — Wagon not belonging to a railway enterprise, but at its disposal and authorised to run for it under specified conditions, or wagon hired out by a railway enterprise to third parties. Sometimes also referred to as private car.
Prize — A financial contribution given as a reward following a contest. Where such a contribution is provided under direct management, it shall be governed by Title IX.
PRK — (Car/truck) Park
PRM — Person with Disabilities or Person with Reduced Mobility (TSI)
PRM — See Person with reduced mobility
PRM — Person with Disabilities or Person with Reduced Mobility
PRM — Person with Reduced Mobility
PRM TSI — Person with Reduced Mobility TSI
Proactive — Risk management behaviour consisting of trying to prevent risks before they are realised instead of reacting after they have been realised.
Probability — Measure of the chance of occurrence expressed as a number between 0 and 1, where 0 is impossibility and 1 is absolute certainty.
Proceed aspect — Any signal aspect which permits the driver to pass the signal.
Process — Set of interrelated or interacting activities that uses inputs to deliver an intended result. (ISO 9000:2015, §3.4.1)
Process — Set of interrelated or interacting activities which transforms inputs into outputs (ISO 9000).
Process owner — Person who has the responsibility for the definition, application, performance and improvement of a process in realizing its objectives measured by performance indicators, and has the authority and ability to make necessary changes
Process unit — Unit used for the processing of substances or for the production of energy used in the establishment. In the process unit, equipment generally belongs to one or more general categories, as indicated below. For each category of equipment, examples are given but they do not constitute an exhaustive list. ·         Intermediate storage equipment integrated into the process, e.g., mass solid storage, pressure storage, padded storage, atmospheric storage, cryogenic storage ·         Equipment involving chemical reactions, e.g., reactor ·         Equipment devoted to the physical or chemical separation of substances, e.g., distillation column, absorption column, centrifuge, separators, dryers, sieves, classifiers ·         Equipment designed for energy production and supply, e.g., furnaces, boilers, direct-fired heat exchangers ·         Packaging equipment, equipment dedicated to the packaging of material. Packages are not included here, but only the packaging system ·         Other facilities, e.g., pumps, heat exchangers, compressors, gas expansion facility, piping internal to the process unit, mixers; blenders, etc. …
Processing — Any operation or set of operations which is performed on personal data or on sets of personal data, whether or not by automated means, such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring, storage, adaptation or alteration, retrieval, consultation, use, disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, alignment or combination, restriction, erasure or destruction.
Processing of information — All functions of a CIS with respect to data sets, including creation, modification, display, storage, transmission, deletion and archiving of information. Processing of information can be provided by a CIS as a set of functionalities to users and as IT services to other CIS.
Processing of personal data — The same meaning as in Regulation (EC) No 45/2001, and in particular Article 2 thereof.
Processor — A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body which processes personal data on behalf of the controller.
Procurement — The acquisition by means of a contract of works, supplies or services and the acquisition or rental of land, buildings or other immovable property, by one or more contracting authorities from economic operators chosen by those contracting authorities.
Procurement document — Any document produced or referred to by the contracting authority to describe or determine elements of the procurement procedure, including: (a) the publicity measures set out in Article 163; (b) the invitation to tender; (c)  the tender specifications, including the technical specifications and the relevant criteria, or the descriptive documents in the case of a competitive dialogue; (d) the draft contract.
Product — Result of a process.
Product — A type of train with determined types of services (e.g. high speed, bicycle storage places, PRM accommodation, couchette and/or sleeping cars, dining cars, take-away facilities, etc.) which are linked to relevant prices and may be linked to specific conditions
Product — Any industrially manufactured product and any agricultural product, including fish products
Product — A product obtained through a manufacturing process, including interoperability constituents and subsystems.
Product — Hardware or software, or relevant components of hardware or software, which are intended to be used for the provision of trust services.
Product — Result of a process. Set of interrelated or interacting activities which transforms inputs into outputs
Product — A type of train with determined types of services (e.g. high speed, bicycle storage places, PRM accommodation, couchette and/or sleeping cars, dining cars, take-away facilities, etc.) which are linked to relevant prices and may be linked to specific conditions (from the TAP glossary)
Product — Material, composite or assembly about which information is required.
Product life cycle — Time of the entire life cycle of a product from inception to design and manufacture, service, maintenance  (3.1.2.12) and disposal.
Production — All the activities related to the collection, storage, processing, and analysis necessary for compiling statistics.
Production — Activities to realize products including installation (3.1.2.9), commissioning (3.1.2.1), overhaul (3.1.2.14) and repair. Note 1 to entry: Production is part of an organization's value chain.
Production equipment — Tool or device to make products and provide services. EXAMPLE:Machineries, tools, jigs, fixtures, templates, textures, test benches, software production tools. Note 1 to entry: Handcraft equipment (e.g. hammer, screwdrivers) is not considered as production equipment.
Production phase — The production phase is the period during which rolling stock subsystems may be placed on the market on the basis of an EC declaration of verification referring to a valid EC type or design examination certificate.
Production phase for CCS On-Board Subsystem — It is the period during which the CCS on-board subsystem may be placed on the market on the basis of an EC declaration of verification referring to a valid EC type or design examination certificate. `Any vehicle in production phase shall meet the CCS on-board subsystem requirements after  the deadline stated in the column production phase. This is independent of whether the associated vehicle type design phase is completed before or after the CCS TSI entered into  force. As such, an implementation requirement within the production phase should be taken into account in the overall planning of a vehicle project.’
Productivity — Output divided by the inputs needed to produce that output, in value terms.
Professional independence — Statistics must be developed, produced and disseminated in an independent manner, particularly as regards the selection of techniques, definitions, methodologies and sources to be used, and the timing and content of all forms of dissemination, and that the performance of those tasks is free from any pressures from political or interest groups or from Union or national authorities.
Professional secrecy — The protection of business data information of the kind covered by the obligation of professional secrecy, in particular information about undertakings, their business relations or their cost components as laid down in Article 339 of the TFEU.
Profiling — Any form of automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning that natural person's performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements.
Profiling — Any form of automated processing of personal data consisting of the use of personal data to evaluate certain personal aspects relating to a natural person, in particular to analyse or predict aspects concerning that natural person’s performance at work, economic situation, health, personal preferences, interests, reliability, behaviour, location or movements.
Progressivity/Regressivity — Impact of government policy on income distribution; progressive/regressive effects occur when poor households spend a smaller/larger proportion of their income for a particular measure (e.g. a tax) than do richer households.
Prohibition sign — Safety sign that indicates that a specific behaviour is forbidden.
Project — A proposal for the construction, adaptation or modification of a defined section of the transport infrastructure which aims to improve the capacity, safety and efficiency of that infrastructure and of which the implementation has to be approved by means of an authorising decision.
Project — Unique process undertaken to achieve an objective. Note 1 to entry: A project generally consists of a set of coordinated and controlled activities with start and finish dates, undertaken to achieve an objective conforming to specific requirements, including the constraints of time, cost and resources. Note 2 to entry: An individual project can form part of a larger project structure and generally has a defined start and finish date. Note 3 to entry: In some projects, the objectives and scope are updated and the product or service characteristics defined progressively as the project proceeds. Note 4 to entry: The output of a project can be one or several units of product or service. Note 5 to entry: The project's organization is normally temporary and established for the lifetime of the project. Note 6 to entry: The complexity of the interactions among project activities is not necessarily related to the project size.
Project at an advanced stage of development — Any project the planning or construction stage of which has reached a point where a change in the technical specifications may compromise the viability of the project as planned (Article 2(23) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Project at an advanced stage of development — Any project the planning or construction stage of which has reached a point where a change in the technical specifications may compromise the viability of the project as planned.
Project at an advanced stage of development — Any  project  the  planning or construction  stage of which  has  reached a  point where a change in the technical specifications may compromise the viability of the project as planned (Article 2(23) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Project at an advanced stage of development — Any  project  the  planning  or  construction  stage  of  which  has  reached  a  point where a change in the technical specifications may compromise the viability of the project as planned (Article 2(23) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Project authorising decision — A decision or a set of decisions, including of an administrative nature, taken simultaneously or successively, by an authority or authorities of a Member State, not including administrative and judicial appeal authorities, under a national legal system and administrative law that determines whether or not a project promoter is entitled to implement a project on the geographical area concerned on the core network, extended core network or comprehensive network, without prejudice to any decision taken in the context of an administrative or judicial appeal procedure.
Project core team — People from different functions appointed to support the project manager in leading and controlling the project (3.1.2.18).
Project in an advanced stage of development — Any project whose planning/construction stage has reached a point where a change in the technical  specifications would be unacceptable to the Contracting State concerned. Such an impediment may be legal, contractual, economic, financial, social or environmental in nature and must be duly substantiated.
Project management — Planning, organizing, monitoring, controlling and reporting of all aspects of a project (3.1.2.18), and the motivation of all those involved in it to achieve the project objectives.
Project management plan — Document specifying what is necessary to meet the objective(s) of the project (3.1.2.18). Note 1 to entry: A project management plan should include or refer to the project quality plan. Note 2 to entry: The project management plan also includes or references other plans such as those relating to organizational structures, resources, schedule, budget, risk management, environmental management, health and safety (3.1.1.11) management and security management, as appropriate.
Project of common interest — A project identified in Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013 or Regulation (EU) No 347/2013 or in Article 8 of this Regulation.
Project of common interest — Any project carried out pursuant to this Regulation.
Project organization — Temporary structure that includes project roles, responsibilities and levels of authority and boundaries that need to be defined and communicated to all interested parties of the project (3.1.2.18).
Project promoter — The applicant for authorisation of the implementation of a project or the public authority which initiates a project.
Project quality plan — Specification of the actions, responsibilities and associated resources to be applied to a specific project  (3.1.2.18).
Project/Programme Management Office (PMO) — In the scope of the RFC organisations, the Management Board is supported by a Project/Programme Management Office (PMO) consisting of Project Implementation Managers, the permanent staff of the RFC office and the managing director.
Propelling — Movement of a train where the driver is not in the leading cab of the leading vehicle.
Proposer — One of the following: (a) a railway undertaking or an infrastructure manager which implements risk control measures in accordance with Article 4 of Directive 2004/49/EC. (b) an entity in charge of maintenance which implements measures in accordance with Article 14a(3) of Directive 2004/49/EC. (c) a coNtracting entity or a manufacturer which invites a notified body to apply the ‘EC’ verification procedure in accordance with Article 18(1) of Directive 2008/57/EC or a designated body according to Article 17(3) of that Directive. (d) an applicant for an authorisation for the placing in service of structural sub-systems.
Propulsion system or traction system — System consisting of a source of energy and devices for converting this energy into tractive and/or braking effort. EXAMPLE:Source of energy can be electricity, diesel, hydrogen and other alternative fuels
Protected IBC — (For metal IBCs) an IBC provided with additional protection against impact, the protection taking the form of, for example, a multi-layer (sandwich) or double-wall construction, or a frame with a metal lattice-work casing.
Protected wrong side failure — A wrong side failure where another part of the signalling system provides an acceptable level of protection.
Protection against electrical hazards — Requirements for earthing are considered by parameter 8.3.4 (Earthing).
Protective lining — (For tanks)  a lining or coating protecting the metallic tank material against the substances to be carried. NOTE: This definition does not apply to a lining or coating used only to protect the substance to be carried.
PRP — Replacement proposal for other service
PRR — Passenger Rights Regulation
PRR — Replacement proposal for other RS
PRR — Regulation (EC) No 1371/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 2007 on rail passengers’ rights and obligations. PRR GCC-CIV/PRR
PRT — Replacement proposal for other train
PS — Passive Shunting mode
PS — Palestine, State of
PSD — Platform Screen Doors
Pseudonymisation — The processing of personal data in such a manner that the personal data can no longer be attributed to a specific data subject without the use of additional information, provided that such additional information is kept separately and is subject to technical and organisational measures to ensure that the personal data are not attributed to an identified or identifiable natural person.
Psophometric current — As defined in EN 50121-3-1 Annex A Interference on telecommunication lines - Psophometric currents.
PSTN — Public switched telephone network
PT — Post Trip mode
PT — Portugal
pt — Portuguese
PTI — Platform / Train Interface
PTTI — Postal, Telegraph and Telephone International
Public address system — The parameter is considered as requirement for a one way communication. For communication from passenger to staff see parameter 10.2.3 ‘Passenger alarm’.
Public administration entity — An entity recognised as such in a Member State in accordance with national law, not including the judiciary, parliaments or central banks, which complies with the following criteria: (a) it is established for the purpose of meeting needs in the general interest and does not have an industrial or commercial character; (b) it has legal personality or is entitled by law to act on behalf of another entity with legal personality; (c) it is financed, for the most part, by the State, regional authorities or by other bodies governed by public law, is subject to management supervision by those authorities or bodies, or has an administrative, managerial or supervisory board, more than half of whose members are appointed by the State, regional authorities or by other bodies governed by public law; (d) it has the power to address to natural or legal persons administrative or regulatory decisions affecting their rights in the cross-border movement of persons, goods, services or capital.
Public administration entity — An entity recognised as such in a Member State in accordance with national law, not including the judiciary, parliaments or central banks, which complies with the following criteria: (a) it is established for the purpose of meeting needs in the general interest and does not have an industrial or commercial character; (b) it has legal personality or is entitled by law to act on behalf of another entity with legal personality; (c) it is financed, for the most part, by the State authorities or by other central-level bodies governed by public law, is subject to management supervision by those authorities or bodies, or has an administrative, managerial or supervisory board, more than half of whose members are appointed by the State authorities or by other central-level bodies governed by public law; (d) it has the power to address to natural or legal persons administrative or regulatory decisions affecting their rights in the cross-border movement of persons, goods, services or capital.
Public contract — A contract for pecuniary interest concluded in writing between one or more economic operators and one or more contracting authorities within the meaning of Articles 174 and 178, in order to obtain, against payment of a price paid in whole or in part from the budget, the supply of movable or immovable assets, the execution of works or the provision of services, comprising:  (a) building contracts; (b) supply contracts; (c) work contracts; (d) service contracts.
Public electronic communications network — A public electronic communications network as defined in Article 2, point (8), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972.
Public good — Good/service for which property rights are not defined.Without government intervention, environmental goods (e.g. clean air) are usually treated as public.
Public holidays — All days designated as such in the Member State or in the Community institution in which action is to be taken
Public information symbol — Graphical symbol intended to give information to the general public, the understanding of which is independent of specialist or occupational training.
Public key — One of the asymmetric keys (see)
Public key infrastructure (PKI) — Set of hardware, software, people, policies, and procedures needed to create, manage, distribute, use, store, and revoke digital certificates and manage public key encryption with the purpose to facilitate the secure transfer of information for a range of network activities.
Public passenger transport — Passenger transport services of general economic interest provided to the public on a non-discriminatory and continuous basis.
Public passenger transport services by rail — Public passenger transport by rail, excluding passenger transport by other track-based modes, such as metros or tramways.
Public private partnership — A binding arrangement between public bodies and one or more undertakings other than the main infrastructure manager of a Member State, under which the undertakings partially or totally construct and/or fund railway infrastructure, and/or acquire the right to exercise any of the functions listed in point (2) for a predefined period of time. The arrangement may take any appropriate legally binding form foreseen in national legislation.
Public Private Partnership (PPP) — A financial arrangement where a private investor works together with the public services to build or operate infrastructure.
Public procurement rules — Provisions in the Public Procurement Directive and in the Financial Regulation governing, respectively, the award of contracts by national public administrations (EU countries must transpose these into national law) and the award of contracts by the Union institutions and bodies
Public sector body — A state, regional or local authority, a body governed by public law or an association formed by one or several such authorities or one or several such bodies governed by public law, or a private entity mandated by at least one of those authorities, bodies or associations to provide public services, when acting under such a mandate.
Public sector body — A public sector body as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2019/1024 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Public service compensation — Any benefit, particularly financial, granted directly or indirectly by a competent authority from public funds during the period of implementation of a public service obligation or in connection with that period.
Public service contract — One or more legally binding acts confirming the agreement between a competent authority and a public service operator to entrust to that public service operator the management and operation of public passenger transport services subject to public service obligations; depending on the law of the Member State, the contract may also consist of a decision adopted by the competent authority: - taking the form of an individual legislative or regulatory act, or - containing conditions under which the competent authority itself provides the services or entrusts the provision of such services to an internal operator.
Public service obligation — A requirement defined or determined by a competent authority in order to ensure public passenger transport services in the general interest that an operator, if it were considering its own commercial interests, would not assume or would not assume to the same extent or under the same conditions without reward.
Public service operator — Any public or private undertaking or group of such undertakings which operates public passenger transport services or any public body which provides public passenger transport services.
Publish — The publishing of information or data where no access control shall be applied
Pulling Train — The train to which a coach group is coupled
Put into Service — A procedure dependent on the technical approval of a wagon and a contract for use with a RU, which allows commercial operation of the wagon.
Putting into service — The first use of radio equipment in the Union by its end-user.
PVC — Polyvinyl chloride
PW — Palau
PY — Paraguay
QA — Qatar
QC — Quality Control
QC — Queen’s Counsel
QM — Queue Manager
QMS — Quality Management System
Qualification — The physical and psychological suitability for the task together with the required knowledge.
Qualification — A formal outcome of an assessment and validation process which is obtained when a competent authority determines that an individual has achieved learning outcomes to given standards
Qualified certificate for electronic seal — A certificate for an electronic seal, that is issued by a qualified trust service provider and meets the requirements laid down in Annex III.
Qualified certificate for electronic signature — A certificate for electronic signatures, that is issued by a qualified trust service provider and meets the requirements laid down in Annex I.
Qualified certificate for website authentication — Acertificate for website authentication, which is issued by a qualified trust service provider and meets the requirements laid down in Annex IV.
Qualified electronic registered delivery service — An electronic registered delivery service which meets the requirements laid down in Article 44.
Qualified electronic seal — An advanced electronic seal, which is created by a qualified electronic seal creation device, and that is based on a qualified certificate for electronic seal.
Qualified electronic seal creation device — An electronic seal creation device that meets mutatis mutandis the requirements laid down in Annex II.
Qualified electronic signature — An advanced electronic signature that is created by a qualified electronic signature creation device, and which is based on a qualified certificate for electronic signatures.
Qualified electronic signature creation device — An electronic signature creation device that meets the requirements laid down in Annex II.
Qualified electronic time stamp — An electronic time stamp which meets the requirements laid down in Article 42.
Qualified trust service — A trust service that meets the applicable requirements laid down in this Regulation.
Qualified trust service — A qualified trust service as defined in Article 3, point (17), of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014.
Qualified trust service provider — A trust service provider who provides one or more qualified trust services and is granted the qualified status by the supervisory body.
Qualified trust service provider — A qualified trust service provider as defined in Article 3, point (20), of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014.
Qualitative approach — Risk estimations using a qualitative (verbal) approach to the frequencies and severity of hazardous scenarios. In principle, a given risk may be estimated either with qualitative or quantitative approach and should be perceived in the same way by interested parties.
Quality assurance — Asystematic programme of controls and inspections applied by any organization or body which is aimed at providing confidence that the safety prescriptions in RID are met in practice.
Quality assurance method — Method applied to qualify, verify or validate the implementation of requirements in order to focus on error prevention rather than on error detection. EXAMPLE: Failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA), failure mode, effects and criticality analysis (FMECA), quality function deployment, design reviews, finite element analysis. Note 1 to entry: Quality assurance method can be used, for example, in design and development.
Quality deficiency cost — Additional costs resulting from nonconforming products, services, processes or equipment. Note 1 to entry: Quality deficiency cost can be distinguished by causes (e.g. failures in tender-, design and development-, production-, purchasing-project management processes) and by phase of occurrence (e.g. tender, design, production (3.1.2.16), post-delivery). Note 2 to entry: Quality deficiency cost can include: - additional labour, material or other direct costs in the context of failures or changes due to incorrect design and the resulting actions taken (e.g. rework, redesign, repair, repurchase, special shipments); - costs due to downtimes; - costs of scrap; - costs of products rendered unusable or oversupply of storage; - costs due to accepted third-party claims and costs due to claims not asserted by the organization against third parties; - costs due to penalties for default or delays. EXAMPLE:Some examples of quality deficiency cost include nonconformity cost, cost of non-quality, cost of poor quality, lost cost, compensation cost.
Quantitative approach — Risk estimations using a mathematical approach to the frequencies and the severity of hazardous scenarios.
Quasi-equity investment — A type of financing that ranks between equity and debt, having a higher risk than senior debt and a lower risk than common equity and which can be structured as debt, typically unsecured and subordinated and in some cases convertible into equity, or into preferred equity.
QUEST — 1. Quality electrical systems test 2. Quarterly European simulation tool 3. Query evaluation and search technique
Quick Response code (QR code) — An ISO/IEC 18004:2015-compliant encoding and visualisation of data.
Quiet area in an agglomeration — An area, delimited by the competent authority, for instance which is not exposed to a value of Lden or of another appropriate noise indicator greater than a certain value set by the Member State, from any noise source.
Quiet area in open country — An area, delimited by the competent authority, that is undisturbed by noise from traffic, industry or recreational activities.
Quieter route — A part of the railway infrastructure with a minimum length of 20 km on which the average number of daily operated freight trains during the night-time as defined in national legislation transposing Directive 2002/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council ( 5 ) was higher than 12. The freight traffic in the years 2015, 2016 and 2017 shall be the basis for the calculation of that average number. In case the freight traffic due to exceptional circumstances diverges in a given year from that average number by more than 25 %, the Member State concerned can calculate the average number on the basis of the remaining two years.
Quota — A predefined number of accommodations that can be sold for a given booking class, in quota managed pricing systems
Q_NVDRIVER_ADHES — Qualifier determining whether the driver is allowed to modify the  adhesion  factor  used  by  the  ETCS  on-board  to  calculate the  braking  curves According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
Q_NVEMRRLS — Qualifier  defining  whether  the  application  of  the  emergency brake for reasons other than a trip can be revoked as soon  as the  conditions  for  it  have  disappeared  or  after  the  train  has come  to  a  complete  standstill. According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
Q_NVSBTSMPERM — Permission  to  use  service  brake  in  target  speed  monitoring
R — Risk indicator
R & D — Research and development
R(DGR, N FAT) — Indicator of the risk posed by a dangerous goods release (DGR) with a number N of fatalities (N FAT)
R.E.3 — United Nations Consolidated Resolution on the Construction of Vehicles
Radiant heat flux — Oower emitted, transferred or received in the form of radiation.
Radiation detection system — An apparatus that contains radiation detectors as components.
Radio  Network  ID — Unique   identification   of   the   GSM-R   network   the   calling mobile  station  has  to  register  with,  as  defined  in  the  specifi cation  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
Radio block centre — A centralised safety unit that receives train position information via radio and sends movement authorities via radio to trains.
Radio Block Centre (RBC) — ETCS trackside centralised unit controlling ETCS train movements in level 2.
Radio Block Centre (RBC) — ETCS trackside centralised unit controlling ETCS train movements in level 2 / 3.
Radio communication — Exchange of information between the ETCS on-board and the RBC/radio infill unit.
Radio communication — Communication by means of radio waves.
Radio communication — Exchange of information between the ETCS on-board and the RBC / radio infill unit.
Radio equipment class — A class identifying particular categories of radio equipment which, under this Directive, are considered similar and those radio interfaces for which the radio equipment is designed.
Radio hole — A pre-defined area where it is not possible to establish a reliable radio communication channel.
Radio hole — A known area where it is not possible to establish or maintain a reliable radio connection.
Radio hole — A  pre-defined  area  where  it  is  not  possible  to  establish  a  reliable  radio communication channel.
Radio INFILL Unit — A unit which provides a semi-continuous infill function via GSM- R.
Radio interface — The specification of the regulated use of radio spectrum.
Radio network type, ETCS — The radio communication network(s) (FRMCS, FRMCS+GSM- R, GSM-R) with which the trackside is equipped for bi- directional data communication between the ETCS on-board equipment and RBCs.
Radio System Compatibility (RSC) — It is the recording of technical compatibility between voice or data radio on-board and the trackside parts of RMR of the CCS subsystems within an area of use.
Radio system compatibility data — Radio requirements used for demonstrating technical compatibility data
Radio system compatibility voice — Radio  requirements used for demonstating technical compatibility voice
Radio waves — Electromagnetic waves of frequencies lower than 3 000 GHz, propagated in space without artificial guide.
Radio-based ERTMS — The European Train Control System (ETCS) application level 2 that does not require lineside signals and uses a Class A radio system for the safety and non-safety related data exchange between track and train pursuant to Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/1695.
Radioactive contents — For the carriage of radioactive material, mean the radioactive material together with any contaminated or activated solids, liquids, and gases within the packaging.
Radiodetermination — Determination of the position, velocity and/or other characteristics of an object, or the obtaining of information relating to those parameters, by means of the propagation properties of radio waves.
Rail coach — Passenger railway vehicle other than a railcar or a railcar trailer.
Rail Facilities Portal (RFP) — The Rail Facilities Portal provides quick access to information on all kinds of rail facilities, in particular rail freight facilities, e.g. for the planning of rail services.
Rail Freight Corridor (RFC) — All designated railway lines, including railway ferry lines, on the territory of or between Member States, and, where appropriate, European third countries, linking two or more terminals, along a principal route and, where appropriate, diversionary routes and sections connecting them, including the railway infrastructure and its equipment and relevant rail services in accordance with Article 5 of Directive 2001/14/EC.'
Rail freight governance — The governance bodies referred to in Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 913/2010.
Rail freight terminal — Train station used exclusively or predominantly for loading and unloading of goods, for formation, dispatch, reception and temporary stabling of trains and/or for stabling and marshalling of rolling stock.
Rail freight transport — The definitions of various kinds of rail transport are: Total rail transport Total rail transport (in tonne-kilometres) was calculated as a sum of national, international and transit transport, where international transport is the sum of international loaded and unloaded in the reporting country. National rail transport Rail transport where the goods are both loaded and unloaded within the same reporting Member State, irrespective of the route followed by the railway vehicle. International rail transport Rail transport where the goods are either loaded or unloaded, but not both, in the reporting Member State, with a distinction between goods loaded and goods unloaded. Rail transit Rail transport where the goods pass through the reporting Member State without being loaded, unloaded or transshipped.
Rail inclination — An  angle  defining  the  inclination  of  the head of a rail relative to the running surface
Rail inclination — An angle defining the inclination of the head of a rail when installed in the track relative to the plane of the rails (running surface), equal to the angle between the axis of symmetry of the rail (or of an equivalent symmetrical rail having the same rail head profile) and the perpendicular to the plane of the rails.
Rail infrastructure — The facilities that are necessary to enable a railway to operate, including: ◗  Railway tracks and associated track structures; ◗  Service roads, signalling systems, communications systems, rolling stock; ◗  Control systems, train control systems, and data management systems; ◗  Notices and signs; ◗  Electrical power supply and electric traction systems; ◗  Associated buildings, workshops, depots, and yards; and ◗  Plant, machinery, and equipment.
Rail infrastructure manager — Any firm or body responsible, in particular, for establishing, managing and maintaining railway infrastructure, including traffic management and control-command and signalling. Sometimes also referred to as operator.
Rail loading gauge — The profile through which a railway vehicle and its loads must pass, taking into account tunnels and track side obstacles.
Rail loading gauge — The profile through which a rail vehicle and its loads (wagons - ITUs) must pass, taking into account tunnels and track-side obstacles. There are 4 basic gauges recognised by UIC: international gauge, A, B and C gauge. These gauges are indicated for individual lines. In principle, the smallest loading gauge may not be exceeded throughout the transport journey. Restrictions regarding the width and height of the load in curves have to be taken into account. Combined transport consignments often exceed loading gauges A and B. Another gauge of particular significance for combined transport is the B+ Gauge. There are also cmany other gauge codes (P/C/S/…) recognised.
Rail Market Monitoring Scheme (RMMS) — Instrument through which the European Commission monitors the technical and economic conditions and market developments of European rail transport.
Rail mounted machine — Machine which has wheels suitable for running on railway tracks and is intended for the construction, maintenance, inspection, repair and renewal of railway infrastructure.
Rail Net Europe (RNE) — A body grouping European infrastructure managers to allow the planning of international train paths.
Rail pad — A resilient layer fitted between a rail and the supporting sleeper or baseplate.
Rail passenger — Any person, excluding members of the train crew, who makes a journey by rail. Passengers making a journey solely by railway-operated ferry or bus services are excluded. Passengers for whose transportation a rail enterprise does not receive commercial remuneration are included as well. Stowaways or unauthorized users on freight trains and train surfers on passenger trains are excluded.
Rail passenger — Any person, excluding members of the train crew, who makes a trip by rail. For accident statistics, passengers trying to embark/disembark onto/from a moving train are included.
Rail passenger disembarked — A passenger alighting from a railway vehicle after having been conveyed by it. A passenger transfer from one railway vehicle directly to another one, regardless of the railway transport operator, shall not be regarded as disembarkation/embarkation. Whenever during the transfer another mode of transport is used, this is to be regarded as disembarkation from a railway vehicle followed by a subsequent embarkation on a railway vehicle.
Rail passenger embarked — Passenger who boards a railway vehicle to be conveyed by it. A passenger transfer from one railway vehicle directly to another one, regardless of the railway transport operator, shall not be regarded as disembarkation/embarkation. Whenever during the transfer another mode of transport is used, this is to be regarded as disembarkation from a railway vehicle followed by a subsequent embarkation on a railway vehicle.
Rail passenger journey — The combination between the place of embarkation and the place of disembarkation of the passengers conveyed by rail whichever itinerary is followed on the railway network.
Rail passenger-kilometre (pkm) — Unit of measurement representing the transport of one rail passenger by rail over a distance of one kilometre. The distance to be taken into consideration should be the distance actually travelled by the passenger on the network. To avoid double counting each country should count only the pkm performed on its territory. If this is not available, then the distance charged or estimated should be used
Rail return current — Interference current at the point of connection to the railway power supply network - pantograph/shoe gear level.
Rail Standardisation Coordination Platform for Europe (RASCOP) — Platform contributing to streamlining the European standardisation landscape with the EC and stakeholders.
Rail system — (As in ‘trans-European rail system’) the structure, as described in Annex I (Directive 2008/57/EC), composed of lines and fixed installations, of the trans-European transport network, built or upgraded for conventional rail transport and combined rail transport, plus the rolling stock designed to travel on that infrastructure
Rail track gauge — Track gauge: The smallest distance between a pair of rails measured between the inside surfaces of the rail heads. It is distinguished between broad/large (more than 1,435 mm), standard (1,435 mm) and narrow (less than 1,435 mm) gauge railway track.
Rail transit — Rail transport where the goods pass through the reporting Member State without being loaded, unloaded or transshipped.
Rail transit — Railway transport through a country between two places (a place of loading/embarkation and a place of unloading/disembarkation) outside that country. Operations involving ‘Change of Gauge’ between two different track gauges in a country are considered as transit and not as unloading and loading. Transport operations involving loading/embarkation or unloading/disembarkation of a railway vehicle at the frontier of that country from/onto another mode of transport, for example transition between Railway transport and Maritime transport in ports, are not considered as transit.
Rail transport undertaking or Railway undertaking — A private or public undertaking which is authorised or licensed by applicable law to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this includes undertakings which provide traction only.
Rail van — Non-tractive railway vehicle forming part of a passenger or goods train and used by the train crew as well as for the conveyance of luggage, parcels, bicycles, accompanied road passenger vehicles etc. Vehicles possessing one or more passenger compartments are not counted as vans but as passenger railway vehicles. Mail vans are included under vans when they do not have a passenger compartment. Sometimes also referred to as baggage car.
Rail wagon for intermodal transport — Wagon specially built or equipped for the transport of intermodal transport units (ITUs) or other goods road vehicles. Types of wagons are: •	Pocket wagon: Rail wagon with a recessed pocket to accept the axle/wheel assembly of a semi-trailer. •	Basket wagon: Rail wagon with a demountable sub frame, fitted with devices for vertical handling to allow the loading and unloading of semi-trailers or road motor vehicles. •	Spine wagon: Rail wagon with a central chassis designed to carry a semi-trailer. •	Low-floor wagon: Rail wagon with a low loading platform built to carry, inter alia ITUs. •	Rolling-Road wagon: Rail wagon with low floor throughout which, when coupled together, form a rolling-road. •	Double stack wagon: Rail wagon designed for the transport of containers stacked on top of each other. •	Bimodal semi-trailer: A road semi-trailer that can be converted into a rail wagon by the addition of rail bogies.
Rail-related service — A basic, additional or ancillary service listed in points 2, 3 and 4 of Annex II to Directive 2012/34/EU.
Rail-related services and facilities rail-related services — The services facilities to which a Railway Undertaking may need to have access in order to be able to operate a given train.
Railcar — Vehicle that can operate autonomously and is capable of carrying a payload (passengers or luggage/mail or freight
Railcar — Tractive railway vehicle with motor constructed for the conveyance of passengers or goods by rail. The definition of the various categories of locomotives (electric, diesel) applies, similarly to railcar categories. A block composed of railcars and railcar trailers can be referred to as: •	‘Multiple unit’ if it is modular; •	‘Trainset’ if it is fixed. In tractive vehicle statistics, each railcar in an indivisible set is counted separately; in statistics of passenger vehicles and goods vehicles, each body fitted to carry passengers or goods (tractive and non-tractive) is counted as one unit. Independent of drivers’ compartments installed or not, any unit with tractive power must be considered as a tractive vehicle. When two railcar units have a common tractive bogie, both units are considered as a tractive vehicle.
Railcar — Self-propelled railway vehicle with driving controls designed to carry payload. Note 1 to entry: These railway vehicles can be designed to push or pull other railway vehicles.
Railcar trailer — Non-tractive passenger railway vehicle coupled to one or more railcars. Vehicles for the transport of goods, even when pulled by a railcar, are referred to as wagons.
RailNetEurope (RNE) — RailNetEurope (RNE) was set up in 2004 by a number of European railway Infrastructure Managers and Allocation Bodies to tackle operational issues in the field of international rail. It is a voluntary initiative emanating from Infrastructure Managers across Europe and represents its members as an Association for Facilitating International Traffic on the European Rail Infrastructure. RNE encourages its members to adopt a common document structure for their respective Network Statements and to translate these into English. The aim is to provide high standards of user-friendliness and customer orientation, and to assist those who need to consult more than one statement for their intended (international) operations.
Railway — It is a line of communication between two or more geographic locations consisting, usually, of one or more railway lines constructed from two parallel steel rails that is for the exclusive use of railway vehicles.
Railway — A line of communication made up by rail exclusively for the use of railway vehicles.
Railway enterprise — Any private or public enterprise acting mainly as a railway transport operator, an infrastructure manager or as an integrated company. An enterprise whose main business is not related to railways should be included if it has a railway market share that is not marginal. Only the activities related to railways should be reported.
Railway enterprise-owned wagon — Any wagon belonging to a railway enterprise. Excluded are privately-owned wagons. Sometimes also referred to as railroad car.
Railway infrastructure — All tracks and fixed equipment necessary for the movement of rail traffic and transport safety.
Railway infrastructure — The items listed in Annex I.  ANNEX I Railway infrastructure consists of the following items, provided they form part of the permanent way, including sidings, but excluding lines situated within railway repair workshops, depots or locomotive sheds, and private branch lines or sidings: - Ground area, - Track and track bed, in particular embankments, cuttings, drainage channels and trenches, masonry trenches, culverts, lining walls, planting for protecting side slopes, etc.; passenger and goods platforms, including in passenger stations and freight terminals; four-foot way and walkways; enclosure walls, hedges, fencing; fire protection strips; apparatus for heating points; crossings etc.; snow protection screens, - Engineering structures: bridges, culverts and other overpasses, tunnels, covered cuttings and other underpasses; retaining walls, structures for protection against avalanches, falling stones, etc., - Level crossings, including appliances to ensure the safety of road traffic, - Superstructure, in particular: rails, grooved rails and check rails; sleepers and longitudinal ties, small fittings for the permanent way, ballast including stone chippings and sand; points, crossings, etc.; turntables and traverses (except those reserved exclusively for locomotives), - Access way for passengers and goods, including access by road and access for passengers arriving or departing on foot, - Safety, signalling and telecommunications installations on the open track, in stations and in marshalling yards, including plant for generating, transforming and distributing electric current for signalling and telecommunications; buildings for such installations or plant; track brakes, - Lighting installations for traffic and safety purposes, - Plant for transforming and carrying electric power for train haulage: substations, supply cables between substations and contact wires, catenaries and supports; third rail with supports, - Buildings used by the infrastructure department, including a proportion of installations for the collection of transport charges.
Railway Infrastructure — All the railway lines and fixed installations, so far as this necessary for the circulation of railway vehicles and the safety of traffic
Railway infrastructure manager — Any public body or undertaking responsible in particular for establishing or maintaining the railway infrastructure, and for managing the control and safety systems.
Railway infrastructure or Infrastructure — All the railway lines and fixed installations so far as these are necessary for the compatibility with and safe circulation of vehicles admitted according to these Uniform Rules.
Railway Interoperability and Safety Committee (RISC) — Committee that holds the deciding vote on whether a draft TSI, CSM, CSIor CST can be adopted by the European Commission. The committee consists of representatives from the Member States and is chaired by the European Commission.
Railway line — A railway line is a line of communication made up by rail exclusively for the use of railway vehicles. Lines are one or more adjacent running tracks forming a route between two points. Where a section of network comprises two or more lines running alongside one another, there are as many lines as routes to which tracks are allotted exclusively. A running track is a track providing end-to-end line continuity designed for trains between stations or places indicated in tariffs as independent points of departure or arrival for the conveyance of passengers or goods. A track is a pair of rails over which rail borne vehicles can run.
Railway line — Line of transportation made up by rail exclusively for the use of railway vehicles and maintained for running trains. A line is made up of one or more tracks, according to the definition A.I-01 Track and the corresponding exclusion criteria. Excluded are: •	Stretches of road or water even if rolling stock is conveyed over such routes, e.g. by wagon-carrying trailers or ferries.
Railway location of Operational point — Kilometre related to line identification de fining  the  location  of  the  OP.  This  will normally be in the centre of the OP.
Railway location of particular points requiring specific checks — Location   of   particular   points   requiring specific  checks   due  to  deviations  from gauging referred to in 1.1.1.1.3.1.1.
Railway location of particular points requiring specific checks — Location   of   particular   points   requiring specific  checks   due  to  deviations  from gauging referred to in 1.2.1.0.3.4.
Railway location of structures requiring specific checks — Localisation of structures requiring specific checks
Railway location of trackside HABD — Specific  for  the  French  Italian  and  Swed ish networks. Applicable  if  trackside  HABD  is  not  TSI compliant,  localisation  of   trackside  hot axle box detector.
Railway material — Vehicles, and railway infrastructures.
Railway network — A railway network is the total of all railway lines in a given area. Excluded are, however: - stretches of road or water even if rolling stock is conveyed over such routes, e.g. by wagon carrying trailers or ferries; - railway lines solely used for tourism; - railways constructed solely to serve mines, forests or other industrial or agricultural undertakings and which are not open to public traffic
Railway system — The system composed of the railway infrastructures, comprising lines and fixed installations of the rail system plus the rolling stock of all categories and origin travelling on that infrastructure, as defined in Directives 96/48/EC and 2001/16/EC.
Railway traffic — Any movement of a railway vehicle on lines operated. When a railway vehicle is being carried on another vehicle only the movement of the carrying vehicle (active mode) is considered.
Railway traffic on national territory — Any movement of railway vehicles on lines operated within a national territory irrespective of the country in which these vehicles are registered.
Railway transport — Any movement of goods and/or passengers using a railway vehicle on a given railway network. When a railway vehicle is being carried on another rail vehicle only the movement of the carrying vehicle (active mode) is being considered.
Railway transport operator/railway undertaking — A licensed public or private transport operator which provides services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail. Included are all transport operators that dispose of/provide traction. Excluded are railway transport operators which operate entirely or mainly within industrial and similar installations, including harbours, and railways transport operators which mainly provide local tourist services, such as preserved historical steam railways. Sometimes also referred to as railroad.
Railway tunnel — A railway tunnel is an excavation or a construction around the track provided to allow the railway to pass for example higher land, buildings or water. The length of a tunnel is defined as the length of the fully enclosed section, measured at rail level. A tunnel in the context of this TSI is 0.1 km or longer. Where certain requirements apply only to longer tunnels, thresholds are mentioned in the relevant clauses.
Railway undertaking — Any private or public undertaking whose main business is to provide rail transport services for goods and/or passengers with a requirement that the undertaking should ensure traction; such traction may be provided using rolling stock that is not the property of the railway undertaking concerned and using staff who are not directly employed by the railway undertaking concerned.
Railway undertaking — Railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU, and any other public or private undertaking, the activity of which is to provide transport of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking is to ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only (Article 2(45) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Railway undertaking — Any public or private undertaking the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail, with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only
Railway undertaking — A railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU, and any other public or private  undertaking, the activity of  which is to provide transport of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking is to ensure traction; this also includes  undertakings which provide traction only.
Railway undertaking — Any railway undertaking as defined in Directive 2001/14/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February 2001 on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure (1), and any other public or private undertaking, the activity of which is to provide trans- port of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking must ensure traction. The term also includes undertakings which provide traction only.
Railway undertaking — Any public or private undertaking licensed according to this Directive, the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only.
Railway Undertaking — Any public or private undertaking, the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only.
Railway Undertaking — Railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU, and any other public or private undertaking, the activity of which is to provide transport of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking is to ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only  (Article 2(45) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Railway undertaking — Any public or private undertaking which provides services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail. Undertakings whose only business is to provide services for the transport of passengers by metro, tram and/or light rail are excluded.
Railway undertaking — A railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU.
Railway undertaking — A railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU, and any other public or private undertaking, the activity of which is to provide transport of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking is to ensure traction, including undertakings which provide traction only (Directive (EU) 2016/798). Any public or private undertaking licensed according to this Directive, the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only (Directive 2012/34/EU).
Railway Undertaking — Any public or private undertaking, licensed according to applicable Community legislation, the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide  traction only.
Railway Undertaking (RU) — Railway undertaking (Directive (EU) 2016/798): means railway undertaking as defined in point (1) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU, and any other public or private undertaking, the activity of which is to provide transport of goods and/or passengers by rail on the basis that the undertaking must ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only. A RU can assume the roles Lead RU and/or Responsible Applicant and/or Responsible RU
Railway Undertaking (RU) — Any public or private undertaking licensed according to DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU, the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail. There is a requirement that the undertakings ensure traction, and this also includes undertakings which provide traction only.' The OTIF definition is similar: “rail transport undertaking”, or “railway undertaking”, means a private or public undertaking which is authorised or licensed by applicable law to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this includes undertakings which provide traction only.
Railway Undertaking Advisory Group (RAG) — The management board shall set up an advisory group made up of railway undertakings interested in the use of the freight corridor. This advisory group may issue an opinion on any proposal by the management board which has consequences for these undertakings. It may also issue own-initiative opinions. The management board shall take any of these opinions into account.
Railway vehicle — A vehicle suitable to circulate on its own wheels on railway lines with or without traction.
Railway vehicle — Mobile equipment running exclusively on rails, moving either under its own power (tractive vehicles) or hauled by another vehicle (coaches, railcar trailers, vans and wagons). The following vehicles are included in the statistics for a railway enterprise: •	All railway vehicles belonging to the railway enterprise and hired by it and actually at its disposal, including those under or waiting for repair, or stored in working or non-working order, and foreign vehicles at the disposal of the enterprise and vehicles of the enterprise temporarily abroad and engaged in the normal course of running. •	Private owners’ wagon, i.e. those not belonging to the railway enterprise but authorized to be operated by it under specified conditions, together with wagons hired out by the railway enterprise to third parties and being operated as private owners’ wagons. Statistics for a railway enterprise exclude vehicles not at its disposal, i.e. •	Foreign vehicles or vehicles not belonging to the railway enterprise circulating on the railway network. •	Vehicles which are on hire to, or otherwise at the disposal of, other railway bodies. •	Vehicles reserved exclusively for service transport condemned or intended for sale or, breaking-up.
Railway vehicle — Mobile equipment running exclusively on rails, moving either under its own power (tractive vehicles) or hauled by another vehicle (coaches, railcar trailers, vans and wagons).
Railway vehicle journey — Any movement of a railway vehicle from a specified point of origin to a specified point of destination. A journey can be divided into a number of sections or stages.
Railways capital stock — An estimated monetary value reflecting the current stock of physical railways transport infrastructure assets. For statistical purposes it is recommended to use the net capital value which takes into account depreciation. There are various methods such as ”the replacement cost method” or the “Perpetual Inventory Method (PIM)” that provide the net value of the assets.
Railway infrastructure — Fixed structures and facilities of a railway system. EXAMPLE:Railway track, platforms, stations and shunting yards, as well as railway specific needs for tunnels, bridges and other civil works
Railway operation — Processes and procedures to provide railway transport and its related functions. Note 1 to entry: Railway operations can also include retail and consumer services.
Railway system — System of infrastructure, related rolling stock, and associated operation Note 1 to entry: The term "railroad" is used e.g. in North America. Note 2 to entry: For structure of terms see Annex A, Figure A.1.
Railway track — Assembly of rails or guides or both, fastenings, and structural elements to support and guide railway vehicles.
Railway vehicle or rail vehicle — Individual element of a means of transport mechanically or magnetically guided and supported by track.
Rain — Parameter without explanation in the document
Rain-out — Release of small liquid drops from the fraction of the flashing liquid that remains initially suspended in the atmosphere.
RAM — Random access memory
RAM — Reliability, availability, maintainability
RAM(S) — Reliability, Availability, Maintainability, (Safety)
RAMS — Reliability, Availability, Maintainability and Safety
RAMS — Reliability, availability, maintainability, safety
Range — Group of Tariffs that is useful to consider as a whole according to some criteria (dedicated to a type of distribution, like RIT for Tour Operators, or to a specific RU in case of bilateral agreement, or presenting the same sales and after sales conditions, etc.)
Range of use of the platform boarding aid — Information  of  the  train  access  level  for which the boarding aid can be used.
RAP — Roll Away Protection
RAPID — Database giving daily view of EU activities, managed by the Directorate-General for Press and Communication of the European Commission
RARE — Associated networks for European research
RBC — Radio Block Centre
RBC Area — Trackside area which is supervised by one RBC.
RBC/RBC Border — The border location between two areas supervised by two different RBCs.
RBC/RBC Handhover — The process of passing the supervision of a train between two Radio Block Centres.
RBC/RBC Transition — Alternative term to RBC/RBC handover
RCC — Route Compatibility Check
RCT2 — RCT2 is the railway standard for the electronic issue of international, and where appropriate national, tickets and reservations on paper. It can be used either as ticket only, as reservation only or as combined ticket and reservation, the latter mainly for IRT offers.
RCT2 — RCT2 (Rail Combined Ticket) is the railway standard for the electronic issue of international, and where appropriate national, tickets and reservations on paper. It can be used either as ticket only, as reservation only or as combined ticket and reservation, the latter mainly for IRT offers.
RCT2 compressed — RCT2 compressed is the railway RCT2 standard for the electronic issue of international, and where appropriate national, tickets and reservations on paper on which barcodes are also printed. The RCT2 compressed standard may only be used in conjunction with 2D barcodes.
RD — Roads
RDA function — Reference Data Administration function
RDD — Reference Document Database (https://rdd.era.europa.eu/RDD/)
RDD — Research, development and demonstration
RE — Registration Entity, that is the body designated by each Member State in accordance with this Decision
RE — ATO Ready
RE — Réunion
Re-routing option — A re-routing option is an alternative route that may be taken in a situation of a disruption to reach the same destination. The used term in this handbook is not linked to the term “alternative route” as defined in Article 3 (9) of DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU (Recast): “another route between the same origin and destination where there is substitutability between the two routes for the operation of the freight or passenger service concerned by the railway undertaking”, because easy substitutability cannot be ensured.
Re-routing scenario — Scenarios for selected line segments prepared by infrastructure managers, in order to react fast and coordinated during the disruption. These scenarios consist of specific traffic management procedures and measures agreed by the responsible infrastructure managers.  RNE Handbook for International Contingency Management: The re-routing scenario is compled of possible re-routing opitons related to individual ICM line sections. Each re-routing scenario shall include the following information: - Information about re-routing options including infrastructure parameters on the routes; - Indicative information about capactiy and usability of re-routing oopiton, if feasible; - Information about locations, where loading/unloading of the train can be done, if possible.
Reach stacker — Tractor vehicle with front equipment for lifting, stacking or moving ITUs.
Reactivation of authorisation — Decision taken by an authorising entity according to which a suspension of authorisation it previously issued no longer applies.
Real time — The ability to exchange or process information on specified events (such as arrival at a station, passing a station or departure from a station) on the trains journey as they occur.
Realisation identifier — It is part of the system identifier and means a figure or a number of figures defined by the individual configuration management of a supplier, which represents a specific configuration (e.g. HW and SW) of a CCS subsystem or Interoperability constituent.
Rear and side view — Requirements concerning rear and side view: opening side windows/panel at each side of the cab, (clearance of the opening window/panel), exterior mirrors, camera system.
Reasonable accommodation — Necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments not imposing a disproportionate or undue burden, where needed in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise on an equal basis with others of all human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Reasonable profit — A rate of return on own capital that takes account of the risk, including that to revenue, or the absence of such risk, incurred by the operator of the service facility and is in line with the average rate for the sector concerned in recent years.
Reasons for which an ETCS Radio Block Center can reject a train — List  of  cases  subject  to  system  design  choices  made  by  the infrastructure    manager     according    to    the    specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [C]
REC — Radio Emergency Call
Recall — Any measure aimed at achieving the return of a product that has already been made available to the end user.
Recall — Any measure aimed at achieving the return of radio equipment that has already been made available to the end-user.
Receptacle — (Class 1) includes boxes, bottles, cans, drums, jars and tubes, including any means of closure used in the inner or intermediate packaging.
Receptacle — A containment vessel for receiving and holding substances or articles, including any means of closing. This definition does not apply to shells (see also "Close cryogenic receptacle", ``Open cryogenic receptacle",  "Inner receptacle", "Pressure receptacle", "Rigid inner receptacle" and "Gas cartridge").
Recharging pool — One or more recharging stations at a specific location.
Recharging station — A physical installation at a specific location, consisting of one or more recharging points.
Recipient — A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not. However, public authorities which may receive personal data in the framework of a particular inquiry in accordance with Union or Member State law shall not be regarded as recipients; the processing of those data by those public authorities shall be in compliance with the applicable data protection rules according to the purposes of the processing.
Recipient — A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or another body, to which the personal data are disclosed, whether a third party or not. However, public authorities which may receive personal data in the framework of a particular inquiry in accordance with Union or Member State law shall not be regarded as recipients; the processing of those data by those public authorities shall be in compliance with the applicable data protection rules according to the purposes of the processing.
Recipient — A beneficiary, a contractor, a remunerated external expert or a person or entity receiving prizes or funds under a financial instrument or implementing Union funds pursuant to point (c) of the first subparagraph of Article 62(1).
Recognition — An attestation by a national body other than the national accreditation body that the assessment body meets the requirements set out in Annex II to this Regulation to carry out the independent assessment activity specified in Article 6(1) and (2).
Recognition — A formal statement on the competence of a person or an entity to perform training tasks or examinations, issued by an authority appointed for this purpose by the Member State.
Recognition — 1. the acknowledgment by a competent national body other than the accreditation body that an entity meets the applicable requirements, or  2. the acceptance by a competent authority of certificates, procedural documentation or test results which are issued by an entity from another Contracting State.
Recommended — Not fulfilling the requirement will not have any impact on the technical interoperability of the equipment or of the system but it could be fulfilled to facilitate implementation or to enhance performances.
Reconditioned packaging — In particular (a) metal drums that are: (i) cleaned to original materials of construction, with all former contents, internal and external corrosion, and external coatings and labels removed; (ii) restored to original shape and contour, with chimes (if any) straightened and sealed and all nonintegral gaskets replaced; and (iii) inspected after cleaning but before painting, with rejection of packagings with visible pitting, significant reduction in the material thickness, metal fatigue, damaged threads or closures or other significant defects; (b) plastics drums and jerricans that: (i) are cleaned to original materials of construction, with all former contents, external coatings and labels removed; (ii) have all non-integral gaskets replaced; and (iii) are inspected after cleaning with rejection of packagings with visible damage such as tears, creases or cracks, or damaged threads or closures or other significant defects.
Reconversion — A formal process by which the purpose of the service facility is changed to a use other than for the supply of rail related services.
Record — Information, received and created in the form of a document, a collection of data or other form in a digital or analogue medium that is captured in an official repository and managed and maintained as evidence and as an asset.
Recording device — Recording device for the purpose of monitoring the interaction between train driver and the train as well as the parameters of the train. Requirements concerning the recording device, e.g. which information to be recorded, time increment, ability of event-time correlation, recording technology.
Recoveries — Entitlements vis-à-vis the Union’s debtors. The actual recovery of amounts due may take different forms: voluntary payment by the debtor, offsetting of mutual debts, a financial guarantee or enforcement action.
Recovery — Arrangements designed to return to a normal situation after the occurrence of an incident/accident.
Recycled plastics material — Material recovered from used industrial packagings or from other plastics material that has been pre-sorted and prepared for processing into new packagings, including IBCs. The specific properties of the recycled material used for production of new packagings shall be assured and documented regularly as part of a quality assurance programme recognized by the competent authority. The quality assurance programme shall include a record of proper pre-sorting and verification that each batch of recycled plastics material which is of homogeneous composition, is consistent with the material specifications (melt flow rate, density, and tensile properties) of the design type manufactured from such recycled material. This necessarily includes knowledge about the packaging material from which the recycled plastics have been derived, as well as awareness of the prior use, including prior contents, of the plastics material if that  prior use might reduce the capability of new packagings, including IBCs, produced using that material. In addition, the packaging or IBC manufacturer's quality assurance programme under 6.1.1.4 or 6.5.4.1 shall  include performance of the appropriate mechanical design type test in 6.1.5 or 6.5.6 on packagings or IBCs manufactured from each batch of recycled plastics material. In this testing, stacking performance may be  verified by appropriate dynamic compression testing rather than static load testing; NOTE: ISO 16103:2005 "Packaging – Transport packages for dangerous goods – Recycled plastics material", provides additional guidance on procedures which may be followed in approving the use of  recycled plastics material. These guidelines have been developed based on the experience of the manufacturing of drums and jerricans from recycled plastics material and as such may need to be  adapted for other types of packagings, IBCs and large packagings made of recycled plastics material.
Redio equipment — An electrical or electronic product, which intentionally emits and/or receives radio waves for the purpose of radio communication and/or radiodetermination, or an electrical or electronic product which must be completed with an accessory, such as antenna, so as to intentionally emit and/or receive radio waves for the purpose of radio communication and/or radiodetermination.
Redundancy — The provision of one or more additional elements to achieve or maintain availability of a functionality if one or more of those elements “malfunctions”.
Reel — (Class 1) A device made of plastics, wood, fibreboard, metal or other suitable material comprising a central spindle with, or without, side walls at each end of the spindle. Articles and substances can be wound onto the spindle and may be retained by side walls.
ref — Reference
Reference contour — A contour, associated to each gauge, showing the shape of a cross-section and used as a basis to work out the sizing rules of the infrastructure, on the one hand and of the vehicle, on the other hand
Reference location — A location on the track (e.g. balise group reference location) used as a reference for the information sent from trackside or for the train position
Reference station — A main station to which other minor stations nearby are referenced for fare purposes
Reference steel — A steel with a tensile strength of 370 N/mm2 and an elongation at fracture of 27%.
Reference system — A system proven in use to have an acceptable safety level and against which the acceptability of the risks from a system under assessment can be evaluated by comparison.
Reference track section — Portion of track on which the track decay rates and the acoustic roughness levels are controlled.
Refrigerated wagon (reefer) — Insulated wagon using a source of cooling. Such sources include: •	Natural ice, with or without the addition of salt. •	Eutectic plates; dry ice, with or without sublimation control. •	Liquefied gases, with or without evaporation control, other than a mechanical or ‘absorption’ unit. Such a wagon is capable, with a mean outside temperature of + 30°C, of lowering the temperature inside the empty body to, and thereafter maintaining it, with the aid of appropriate refrigerants and fittings: •	At + 7°C maximum in the case of class A •	At -10°C maximum in the case of class B •	At -20°C maximum in the case of class C •	At 0°C maximum in the case of class D
Refuelling facilities — This is an area which provide fuel for diesel locomotives and Diesel Multiple Units. In EU legislation, it is described as a service to be supplied to the Railway Undertaking as part of 'Track access to services facilities and supply of services'. This request of the Railway Undertaking may only be rejected if viable alternatives under market conditions exist.
Refuelling point — A refuelling facility for the provision of any liquid or gaseous fuel, through a fixed or a mobile installation, which is capable of refuelling only one vehicle, one train, one vessel or one aircraft at a time.
Refuelling station — A single physical installation at a specific location, consisting of one or more refuelling points.
Regenerative braking — Parameter without explanation in the document
Regional organisation — An organisation as defined in Article 38 of the Convention within the exclusive competence that Contracting States have ceded to it.
Regional rail passenger service — A rail passenger service within the meaning of point (7) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU.
Regional services — Transport services operated to meet the transport needs of a region.
Regional services — Transport services whose principal purpose is to meet the transport needs of a region, including a cross-border region.
Register of infrastructure (RINF) — Register of infrastructure indicates the main features of fixed installations, covered by the subsystems: infrastructure, energy and parts of controlcommand and signalling. It publishes performance and technical characteristics mainly related to interfaces with rolling stock and operation (Article 49 of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Register of infrastructure (RINF) — Register  of  infrastructure  indicates  the  main  features  of  fixed  installations, covered   by   the   subsystems:   infrastructure,   energy   and   parts   of   control- command and signalling. It publishes performance and technical characteristics mainly  related  to  interfaces  with  rolling  stock  and  operation  (Article  49  of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Register of infrastructure (RINF) — DIRECTIVE 2016/797/EU, Art. 49: Each Member State shall ensure that a register of infrastructure, stating the values of the network parameters of each subsystem or part subsystem concerned, as set out in the relevant TSI, is published.'  Commission Implementing Regulation 2019/777: provides a list of definitions for the 'Items of the Register of Infrastructure' such as: track, operational point, tunnel, platform, siding, etc
Registration — Capturing a record into a register, establishing that it is complete and properly constituted from an administrative and/or legal standpoint and certifying that it has been sent by an author to an addressee on a given date, as incoming or outgoing mail, or has been incorporated into one of the Commission’s official repositories.
Registration — Temporary relationship between the telephone number and the train running number.
Registration — Temporary  relationship  between  the  telephone  number  and  the  train running number.
Registry — A tool made available by the Governance Entity to keep track of all resources made available by resource producers, that the authorised resource consumers can consult to find at which address the resource can be found and by which method it can be accessed
Regular processes — Regular means a process when performed within a period which is equal to or more than 7 days. Short term means a process when performed within a period which is less than 7 days
Regular vs. Short Term processes — Regular means a process when performed within a period which is equal to or more than 7 days. Short term means a process when performed within a period which is less than 7 days
Regulatory authority — A regulatory authority designated by each Member State pursuant to Article 57(1) of Directive (EU) 2019/944.
Regulatory body — A body established by Member States responsible for monitoring competition in the railway market and to which an applicant has the right to appeal in cases where it believes it has been unfairly treated, discriminated against or is any other way aggrieved, in particular against decisions adopted by an infrastructure manager or where appropriate a railway undertaking.
Regulatory Body (RB) — Under European Union legislation, each Regulatory Body (RB) has the task to oversee the application of Community rules and act as an appeal body in case of disputes. DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU, Article 55: 'Each Member State shall establish a single national regulatory body for the railway sector. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, this body shall be a stand-alone authority which is, in organisational, functional, hierarchical and decision- making terms, legally distinct and independent from any other public or private entity. It shall also be independent in its organisation, funding decisions, legal structure and decision- making from any infrastructure manager, charging body, allocation body or applicant. It shall furthermore be functionally independent from any competent authority involved in the award of a public service contract.' Thus it shall ensure that charges set by the Infrastructure Manager comply with Chapter II of 2001/14/EU and are non-discriminatory. The RB oversees negotiations between applicants and the IM and intervenes when the requirements of 2001/14 are likely to be contravened.                                                                                Applicants have the right to appeal to the RB if they believe that they have been unfairly treated, discriminated against or are in any other way aggrieved. In particular, they may appeal against decisions adopted by the IM (or where appropriate the Railway Undertaking) concerning: a) the network statement; b) criteria contained within it; c) the allocation process and its outcome; d) the charging scheme; e) level or structure of infrastructure fees which it is, or may be, required to pay; f) arrangements for access.
Reitox — European information network on drugs and drug addiction
Relative  distance  of  the  danger  point — Distance  in  meters  to  the  danger  point
Relative price — Price of a good/service relative to one or several other goods (e.g. transport prices relative to a “basket” of all other goods/services produced in the economy).
Release — Abnormal flow/migration of dangerous substance(s) outside the normal containment to the environment which can be described in terms of 1) mass flow rate and duration,2) quantity, 3) emission of radioactivity (number of radionuclide(s) emitted per unit of time) or 4) thermal flux. Equivalent to “Loss of containment”.
Release date/time — Date/time when the goods are expected to be released or were released by the customer.
Release speed — Maximum speed at which a train is allowed to reach the end of its MA.
Release speed — A speed value to allow a train to approach the EOA. Needed for intermittent transmission to enable the train to approach a signal that has cleared in order to reach the information point at the signal.
Release speed — Maximum  speed  at  which  a  train  is  allowed  to  reach  the  end  of  its Movement Authority.
Release time for wagons — Date and time when the wagons are ready to be pulled from the named place on the customer siding.
Release to service — The justified and recorded assurance, accompanied by documentation where appropriate, given by the entity delivering the  maintenance  to  the  fleet-maintenance  manager  that  maintenance  has  been  delivered according to the maintenance orders.
Relevant and reasoned objection — An objection to a draft decision as to whether there is an infringement of this Regulation, or whether envisaged action in relation to the controller or processor complies with this Regulation, which clearly demonstrates the significance of the risks posed by the draft decision as regards the fundamental rights and freedoms of data subjects and, where applicable, the free flow of personal data within the Union.
Relevant date — It is 6 June 2019 as regards those Member States that have not notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 57(2) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 that they have extended the transposition period of that Directive. It means 16 June 2020 as regards those Member States that have notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 57(2) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 that they have extended the transposition period of that Directive and that have not notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 57(2a) of Directive (EU) 2016/797. It means 31 October 2020 as regards those Member States that have notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 57(2a) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 that they have further extended the transposition period of that Directive.
Relevant date — Means 16 June 2019 as regards those Member States that have not notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 33(2) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 that they have extended the transposition period of that Directive. It means 16 June 2020 as regards those Member States that have notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 33(2) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 that they have extended the transposition period of that Directive and that have not notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 33(2a) of Directive (EU) 2016/798. It means 31 October 2020 as regards those Member States that have notified the Agency and the Commission in accordance with Article 33(2a) of Directive (EU) 2016/798 that they have further extended the transposition period of that Directive.
Relevant hazardous equipment — Equipment containing a quantity of hazardous substance higher or equal to a threshold–quantity.
Reliability — The fact that the content of a record can be trusted as a full and accurate representation of the transactions, activities or facts to which they attest and that the record can be depended upon in the course of subsequent transactions or activities.
Reliability — The probability that an item can perform a required function under given conditions for a given time interval. (3) Definitions for other reliability related terms are defined in reference 3.
Reliability — Statistics must measure as faithfully, accurately and consistently as possible the reality that they are designed to represent and implying that scientific criteria are used for the selection of sources, methods and procedures.
Reliability — Ability to perform as required, without failure, for a given time interval, under given conditions Note 1 to entry: The reliability of an item can be calculated from the observed failures of it or/and a set of comparable items during a given time interval. Note 2 to entry: The forecasted reliability of an item expresses the level of confidence on it, estimated from the observed reliability of comparable items and the knowledge about its actual state. Note 3 to entry: In some cases, a given number of unit of use can be considered instead of a given time interval (number of cycles, number of running hours, number of km, etc.). Note 4 to entry: The given conditions may include preventive maintenance (3.1.2.15) actions and operational modes and conditions.
Reliability - availability requirements — Minimum reliability/availability requirements shall be specified in order to limit the decrease of the system safety due to the frequent occurrence of degraded situations.
Reliability of main brake system functionality — Requirement concerning the safe response of the brake system to provide the expected brake force after activation of an emergency brake command.
Reliability of parking brake — Requirement concerning the safe response of the parking brake system to keep the vehicle stationary under calculated circumstances after activation of a parking brake command.
Reliability of stopping distance — Requirement concerning the compliance with the calculated stopping distance after activation of an emergency brake command.
Reliability of traction/braking interlocking — Requirement that tractive effort is safely inhibited after activation of an emergency brake command.
Reliability, Availability, Maintainability, Safety (RAMS) — Reliability – The ability to start and continue to operate under designated operating conditions for a designated period expressed mathematically; Availability – The time in operation compared to the time out of service expressed mathematically; Maintainability – The ability of a system to be put back into service after a failure expressed mathematically; Safety – The probability of a hazardous event being initiated by the system expressed mathematically.
Relief facilities — Service to be supplied by the IM to the RU under DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU, Annex II, 2. (h) as one of the SERVICES TO BE SUPPLIED TO THE RAILWAY UNDERTAKINGS. EU legislation seems to provide no definition, but this service would probably include areas, equipments and infrastructure used to overcome a disruption (derailment, collision or other accidents), such as: a railway crane to remove a fallen tree or large branch from the track, a tow locomotive to pull a defective train, a specially-equipped wagon or a specially-equipped relief team.
Relocation — Modification of the reference balise group of location based information, which is accompanied by the adjustment of the distance(s) counted from its former reference balise group.
Relying party — A natural or legal person that relies upon an electronic identification or a trust service.
Remaining capacity / unplanned capacity — Capacity on a line that is still available after pre-planned capacity for annual timetable, rolling planning as well as TCRs have been assigned.
Remaining Dwell Time — The amount of time left before a train resume moving.
Remanufactured IBC — A metal, rigid plastics or composite IBC that: (a) is produced as a UN type from a non-UN type; or (b) is converted from one UN design type to another UN design type. Remanufactured IBCs are subject to the same requirements of RID that apply to new IBCs of the same type (see also design type definition in 6.5.6.1.1).
Remanufactured IBC — See "Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC)"
Remanufactured large packaging — A metal or rigid plastics large packaging that: (a) Is produced as a UN type from a non-UN type; or (b) Is converted from one UN design type to another UN design type. Remanufactured large packagings are subject to the same requirements of RID that apply to new large packagings of the same type (see also design type definition in 6.6.5.1.2).
Remanufactured large packaging — See "Large packaging"
Remanufactured packaging — In particular (a) metal drums that: (i) are produced as a UN type complying with the requirements of Chapter 6.1 from a non-UN type; (ii) are converted from one UN type complying with the requirements of Chapter 6.1 to another UN type; or (iii) undergo the replacement of integral structural components (such as non-removable heads); (b) plastics drums that: (i) are converted from one UN type to another UN type (e.g. 1H1 to 1H2); or (ii) undergo the replacement of integral structural components. Remanufactured drums are subject to the requirements of Chapter 6.1 which apply to new drums of the same type.
Remote control function from the ground — Requirements concerning the remote control function from the ground. Usually radio remote control function for shunting operation, also remote control by other means, excluded: push-pull train control and double head control.
Renewable energy — `Energy from renewable sources’ as defined in Article 2, second paragraph, point (1), of Directive (EU) 2018/2001: (`energy from renewable sources’ or ‘renewable energy’ means energy from renewable non-fossil sources, namely wind, solar (solar thermal and solar photovoltaic) and geothermal energy, ambient energy, tide, wave and other ocean energy, hydropower, biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas, and biogas.
Renewal — Any major substitution work on a subsystem or part of it, which does not change the overall performance of the subsystem. (Article 2(15) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Renewal — Any major substitution work on a subsystem or part of it which does not change the overall performance of the subsystem.
Renewal — Any major substitution work on a subsystem or part of it, which does not change the  overall  performance  of  the  subsystem.  (Article  2(15)  of  Directive  (EU) 2016/797)
Renewal — Any major substitution work on a subsystem or part subsystem which does not change the overall performance of the subsystem.
Renewal / track renewal — Any major substitution work on a subsystem or part subsystem which does not change the overall performance of the subsystem'.
Renewal of the railway infrastructure — Major substitution works on the existing infrastructure which do not change its overall performance.
RENFE — Red de Ferrocarriles Españoles – Spanish Railways
Repaired IBC — A metal, rigid plastics or composite IBC that, as a result of impact or for any other cause (e.g. corrosion, embrittlement or other evidence of reduced strength as compared to the design type) is restored so as to conform to the design type and to be able to withstand the design type tests. For the purposes of RID, the replacement of the rigid inner receptacle of a composite IBC with a receptacle conforming to the original design type from the same manufacturer is considered repair. However, routine maintenance of rigid IBCs is not considered repair. The bodies of rigid plastics IBCs and the inner receptacles of composite IBCs are not repairable. Flexible IBCs are not repairable unless approved by the competent authority.
Repaired IBC — See "Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC)"
Repatriation — The traveller's return to the place of departure or to another place the contracting parties agree upon.
Reporting country — The Member State transmitting data to Eurostat.
Reporting point — A point on the trains schedule where reporting of the arrival, departure or passing time is required.
Reporting point — Location on the train journey, where the responsible IM has to issue a ‘train running forecast message’ with TETA to the path contracted RU.
Reporting point — Either passing points used by an infrastructure manager to provide train running information (only) or points where forecasts are generated
Repository — A repository is similar to a database and data dictionary; however, it usually encompasses a comprehensive information management system environment. It must include not only descriptions of data structures (i.e. entities and elements), but also metadata of interest to the enterprise, data screens, reports, programs, and systems. Typically, it includes and internal set of software tools, a DBMS, a metamodel, populated metadata, and loading and retrieval software for accessing repository data.
Repository — The storage of data similar to a database and data dictionary; however, it usually encompasses a comprehensive information management system environment. It must include not only descriptions of data structures (i.e. entities and elements), but also Metadata of interest to the enterprise, data screens, reports, programs, and systems
Representative — A natural or legal person established in the Union who, designated by the controller or processor in writing pursuant to Article 27, represents the controller or processor with regard to their respective obligations under this Regulation.
Representative — A natural or legal person established in the Union explicitly designated to act on behalf of a DNS service provider, a TLD name registry, an entity providing domain name registration services, a cloud computing service provider, a data centre service provider, a content delivery network provider, a managed service provider, a managed security service provider, or a provider of an online marketplace, of an online search engine or of a social networking services platform that is not established in the Union, which may be addressed by a competent authority or a CSIRT in the place of the entity itself with regard to the obligations of that entity under this Directive.
Representative configuration — A configuration on the basis of which test results can be achieved, which are valid for various configurations of the same certified ETCS on-board interoperability constituent or of a certified on-board subsystem. These results shall also be equivalent for various configurations of a certified ETCS trackside subsystem.
Representative configuration — A configuration on the basis of which test results can be achieved, which are valid for various configurations of the same certified Interoperability Constituent or of a certified on-board subsystem. These results shall also be equivalent for various configurations of a certified RMR trackside subsystem.
Repression — Action aiming at suppressing a hazardous event after it has taken place.
Repurchase agreement — The sale of securities for cash with an agreement to repurchase them on a specified future date, or on demand.
Requesting reservation system — The reservation system sending a request to the attributing system
Requirements capture — The process of identification, assignment, implementation and validation of requirements performed by the applicant in order to ensure that relevant Union and national requirements are complied with. Requirements capture may be integrated in the product development processes.
Requirements for electrical installations on-board of a railway vehicle — Parameter without explanation in the document
Requirements for number of raised pantographs  and spacing between them, at the given speed — Indication of maximum number of raised pantographs  per  train  allowed  and  minimum spacing centre line to centre line of adjacent  pantograph  heads,  expressed  in metres, at the given speed.
Rescue coupling — The coupling device that enables a unit to be rescued by a recovery power unit equipped with a ‘standard’ manual coupling as per clause 4.2.2.2.3 where the unit to be rescued is equipped with a different coupling system or is not equipped with any coupling system.
Rescue services' information, equipment and access — Description of rolling stock provided to the rescue services to permit them to handle emergencies. In particular information provided on how to obtain access to the interior of the rolling stock.
Research and technological development appropriation — An appropriation entered either in one of the titles of the budget relating to the policy areas linked to ‘Indirect research’ or ‘Direct research’ or in a chapter relating to research activities in another title.
Research organisation — An entity which has as its primary goal to conduct applied research or experimental development with a view to exploiting the results of that research for commercial purposes, but which does not include educational institutions.
Reservation — An authorisation on paper or in electronic form giving entitlement to a service (transportation or assistance) subject to a previously confirmed personalised transport arrangement.
Reservation — An authorisation, on paper or in electronic form, giving entitlement to transportation subject to previously confirmed personalised transport arrangements.
Reservation charge — Infrastructure Managers may levy an appropriate charge for capacity that is allocated but not used. This charge shall provide incentives for a more efficient use of capacity.
Reservation provider — The railway company, which is responsible for the reservation of a train
Reservation system — A computerised system used to store and retrieve information and conduct transactions related to travel. A reservation system is capable of keeping inventory correct in real time, and is accessible to agents/retailers around the world.
Reservation system — A computerised system used to store and retrieve information and conduct transactions related to travel. A reservation system is capable of keeping inventory correct in real time, and is accessible to agents/retailers around the world. (from the TAP glossary)
Reserve capacity — Capacity kept available by the RFCs during the running timetable period for ad-hoc market needs (Article 14(5) Regulation 913/2010)
Residual capacity — Prepared capacity for annual timetable and rolling planning requests, but not being requested or used yet.
Residual concern — A minor issue identified during the assessment of an application for a single safety certificate or for a safety authorisation which does not prevent their issuing and can be deferred for later supervision.
Residual concern — A minor issue identified during the assessment of an application for a single safety certificate which does not prevent its issuing and can be deferred for later supervision.
Residual concern — A minor issue identified during the assessment of an application for a safety authorisation which does not prevent its issuing and can be deferred for later supervision.
Resilience — A critical entity’s ability to prevent, protect against, respond to, resist, mitigate, absorb, accommodate and recover from an incident.
Resistance to pollution — Pollution effects to be considered, e.g. by chemically active substances, contaminating fluids, biologically active substances, dust, stones, ballast and other objects, grasses and leaves, pollen, flying insects, fibres, sand and sea spray.
Response time — Time elapsed from the moment a demand is imposed on the safety barrier and its complete achievement. The response time is measure of the effectiveness of the safety function performed by the safety barrier.
Responsibility and autonomy — The ability of the learner to apply knowledge and skills autonomously and with responsibility
Responsible — Having the obligation to act and take decisions to achieve required outcomes.
Responsible Applicant (RA) — The RA is the applicant/customer and contractor as well as the single point of contact for respective IM (infrastructures manager) in the whole planning process phase. The main task of the role RA is to request the booking of capacity to an IM. The RA does not need to be a Railway Undertaking, it can also be another entity, which is able and permitted to book capacity.
Responsible IM — The Responsible IM (RIM) is the Infrastructure Manager who is the owner of the respective network and responsible for all operational handling of trains and paths on its network.
Responsible RU (RRU) — The RRU is responsible for the run of the train in operation phase, for the whole journey or a section of the journey. If more than one RRU is involved in operating the train, the responsibility is transferred from one RRU to the next RRU at the interchange point. The RRU is the contact entity for the IM in operation phase for all message exchange. Based on an agreement with Responsible Applicant, RRU can also task a subcontractor with running the train, the RRU will nevertheless remain the point of contact for the IM in operation phase.
Rest away from home — Daily rest which cannot be taken at the normal place of residence of the mobile worker.
Rest period — Any period which is not working time.
Rest period — Any period which is not working time/
Reste à Liquider (RAL) — All outstanding commitments which remain to be paid. Applicable for differentiated appropriations where commitments made in one year can be followed by payments when required in subsequent years during the lifetime of the project or contract. RAL = commitments – payments made on the commitments – de-commitments
Restriction — Any condition or limitation indicated in the authorisation of type of vehicle that applies to placing on the market or use of any vehicle in conformity with this type. Restrictions do not include technical characteristics that are included in Section 4 of Annex II (List and format of parameters).
Restriction of processing — The marking of stored personal data with the aim of limiting their processing in the future.
Result — The effects of the implementation of an action determined in accordance with sector-specific rules.
Retailer — A person or an undertaking that sells to the customer a ticket without or with a reservation for a rail service. A retailer can be a railway undertaking (agent) or an accredited travel agent.
Retailer — A person or an undertaking that sells to the customer a ticket without or with a reservation for a rail service. A retailer can be a railway undertaking (agent) or an accredited travel agent. (from the TAP glossary)
Retailer — A trader other than the organiser who sells or offers for sale packages combined by an organiser;
Return — In a return journey, the second half of the journey
Return circuit — All conductors which form the intended path for the traction return current. Therefore, so far as this aspect is concerned, the return circuit is part of the energy subsystem and has an interface with the infrastructure subsystem.
Return circuit — All conductors which form the intended path for the traction return current
Return journey — A journey from an origin A to a destination B, with return to A via the same route.
Return to operation — A notice given to the user, such as a railway undertaking or a keeper, by the entity in  charge of maintenance, based on a release to service, assuring that all appropriate maintenance works  have  been completed and the vehicle, previously removed from operation, is in a condition to be used safely, possibly subject to restrictions of use.
Reused large packaging — A large packaging to be refilled which has been examined and found free of defects affecting the ability to withstand the performance tests; the term includes those which are refilled with the same or similar compatible contents and are carried within distribution chains controlled by the consignor of the product.
Reused large packaging — See "Large packaging"
Reused packaging — A packaging which has been examined and found free of defects affecting the ability to withstand the performance tests. The term includes those which are refilled with the same or similar compatible contents and are carried within distribution chains controlled by the consignor of the product.
Revealed preference — Valuation technique wherein consumers’ choices are revealed in the marketplace (e.g. by the purchase of a good).
Revenue — Income from all sources that finances the budget. Almost all revenue into the EU budget is in the form of own resources. The budget also receives other revenue, such as contributions from third countries for participating in EU programmes, the unused balance from the previous year, taxes paid by EU staff, competition fines, interest on late payments, etc. Some parts of ‘other revenue’ are earmarked for specific expenditure items, others are registered as general revenue
Reverse curve — Two abutting curves of opposite flexure or hand
Reverse movement — A train movement in which the driver is situated in the leading engine but the train is moved in the opposite direction to the train orientation.
Reversing mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that allows the driver to change the direction of movement of the train whilst controlling the train from the same cab.
Review — Activity undertaken to determine the suitability, adequacy and effectiveness of the subject matter to achieve established objectives.
Revocation of authorisation — Decision taken in accordance with Article 26 of Directive (EU) 2016/797 by an authorising entity according to which an authorisation for a vehicle type is no longer valid. Vehicle already authorised to be placed on the market on the basis of its type shall be withdrawn.
Revocation of MA — Withdrawal of a previous given Movement Authority.
Revocation of MA — Withdrawal of a previous given MA.
Revocation of movement authority — Cancellation of a previously given permission to move a train to a given location.
RFC — Rail Freight Corridor
RFC TPM Leader — Person who ensures the overall coordination of Performance Managers along a corridor and acting as a consultation partner for the corridor in the questions of performance analyses (cfr Train Performance Management)
RFF — French railway infrastructure company
RFI — Italian railway infrastructure company
RFT — Right first time
RFU — Recommendation for Use
RFU — Recommendations for use (https://eradis.era.europa.eu/safety_docs/ecm/ recommendationsForUse/default.aspx)
RIC — Regulations governing the reciprocal use of carriages and brake vans in international traffic
RID — RID, Regulations concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail, as adopted under Directive 2008/68/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 September 2008 on the inland transport of dangerous goods
RID — The Regulations concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail, appearing as Appendix C to the Convention concerning International Carriage by Rail (COTIF) concluded at Vilnius on 3 June 1999, as amended.
RID — Regulation concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail, Intergovernmental Organisation for International Carriage by Rail, 2017
RID — Regulations concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail, as adopted under Directive 2008/68/EC
RID — Regulation concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail
RID — Regulations concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Rail
Right side failure — A failure that does not result in the level of protection normally provided by the signalling system being reduced.
Rigid inner receptacle — (For composite IBCs)  a receptacle which retains its general shape when empty without its closures in place and without benefit of the outer casing. Any inner receptacle that is not "rigid" is considered to be "flexible".
Rigid plastics IBC — A rigid plastics body, which may have structural equipment together with appropriate service equipment.
RINF — Register of Infrastructure
RISC — Railway Interoperability and Safety Committee
RISC — Rail Interoperability and Safety Committee
Risk — The frequency of occurrence of accidents and incidents resulting in harm (caused by a hazard) and the degree of severity of that harm.
Risk — The combination of the frequency, probability, and the consequence of a specified hazardous event.
Risk — The frequency of occurrence of accidents and incidents resulting in harm (caused by a hazard) and the degree of severity of that harm (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Risk — Combination of the frequency of occurrence of damage/ harm and the severity of that damage/harm. Note: ISO 45001:2018 is providing a very general definition of risk as being the “effect of uncertainty”. This reference indicates also that “risk is often expressed in terms of a combination of the consequences …/… of an event and the associated ‘likelihood’ …/… of occurrence”, which is a similar expression than the one retained within this framework.
Risk — The potential for loss or disruption caused by an incident and is to be expressed as a combination of the magnitude of such loss or disruption and the likelihood of occurrence of the incident.
Risk acceptance criteria — The terms of reference by which the acceptability of a specific risk is assessed; these criteria are used to determine that the level of a risk is sufficiently low that it is not necessary to take any immediate action to reduce it further.
Risk acceptance criteria — The terms of reference by which the acceptability of a specific risk is assessed; these criteria are used to determine whether the level of a risk is sufficiently low that it is not necessary to take any immediate action to reduce it further.
Risk acceptance principle — The rules used in order to arrive at the conclusion whether or not the risk related to one or more specific hazards is acceptable.
Risk analysis — Systematic use of all available information to identify hazards and to estimate the risk.
Risk analysis — Systematic use of all available information to identify hazards and to estimate the risk (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Risk analysis — Systematic use of information to identify hazards (potential sources of harm) and to estimate the risk.
Risk approach — Technique for estimating externalities whereby external costs are inferred from premiums for risk factors (e.g. the cost of insurance, or of risk diversification).
Risk assessment — The overall process comprising a risk analysis and a risk evaluation.
Risk assessment — A structured approach to assess risks associated with the maintenance of vehicles, including those directly arising from operational processes and the activities of other organisations or persons, and to identify the appropriate risk control measures.
Risk assessment — The overall process comprising a risk analysis and a risk evaluation (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Risk assessment — Overall process of risk identification, risk analysis and risk evaluation.
Risk assessment — The overall process for determining the nature and extent of a risk by identifying and analysing potential relevant threats, vulnerabilities and hazards which could lead to an incident and by evaluating the potential loss or disruption of the provision of an essential service caused by that incident.
Risk assessment body — A body as defined by Article 3(14) of Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 402/2013.
Risk category — One of the railway risk categories specified by Article 7(4)(a) and (b) of Directive 2004/49/EC.
Risk criteria — Reference parameters by which the significance of risk is assessed.
Risk estimation — The process used to produce a measure of the level of risks being analysed, consisting of the following steps: estimation of frequency, consequence analysis and their integration.
Risk estimation — Process used to assign values to the probability and the consequence of risk.
Risk estimation model — A representation of actual or theoretical risks formulated in a way which allows the estimation of the frequency of occurrence and the severity of impacts of the considered risks. The model can be based on lessons learned from past occurrences and/or from a theoretical approach of hazards and likelihoods.
Risk evaluation — A procedure based on the risk analysis to determine whether an acceptable level of risk has been achieved.
Risk evaluation — A procedure based on the risk analysis to determine whether an acceptable level of risk has been achieved (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Risk evaluation — Procedure based on the risk analysis to determine whether a tolerable risk has been achieved.
Risk indicator — A parameter whose assigned value is representing a level of risk.
Risk level — A value or verbal expression representing the result of a risk estimation.
Risk management — The systematic application of management policies, procedures and practices to the tasks of analysing, evaluating and controlling risks.
Risk management — The systematic application of management policies, procedures and practices to the tasks of analysing, evaluating and controlling risks (Regulation (EU) 402/2013).
Risk management — The overall process of risk identification, risk assessment, decision-making, risk treatment and its control.
Risk shifting (or transfer) — Transfer of risks generally supposed to reduce the risk of one system while increasing the risk of another system.
Risk situation — A situation which is described, within a given context, in terms of considered hazardous scenarios and potential resulting risks in terms of estimated frequency and severity of impacts. Related terms: ▶   Reference risk situation: A risk situation taken as a reference input to a decision-making process to be compared with target risk situations. ▶   Target risk situation: A risk situation resulting from the implementation of an option. ▶   Future risk situation: Feasible and optimal target situation resulting from the implementation of a decision-making process which is achievable through a defined set of risk control measures.
Risk to the society as a whole — The collective risk to all categories of persons listed in Article 7(4)(a) of Directive 2004/49/EC.
Risk-sharing instrument — A financial instrument which allows for the sharing of a defined risk between two or more entities, where appropriate in exchange for an agreed remuneration.
RIT — Rail Inclusive Tour
RIU — Radio In-fill Unit
RIV — Regulations concerning the reciprocal use of wagons in international traffic
RIV — Regulations governing the reciprocal use of wagons in international traffic. Regulations governing the reciprocal use of loading tackle, container and pallets in international traffic.
River Information Services or RIS — As defined in Article 3, point (a), of Directive 2005/44/EC of the Parliament and of the Council (31).
RL — Railways
RM — Risk management
RMO — Risk management objective
RMR — Railway Mobile Radio System
RMR — Railway Mobile Radio
RMR terminal — It is an item of mobile radio equipment under the control of the RMR network.
RMS — Risk management strategy
RO — Romania
ro — Romanian
Ro-Ro — Roll on - roll off
RO-RO Ramp — A flat or inclined ramp, usually adjustable, which enables road vehicles to be driven onto or off a ship or a rail wagon.
Ro-Ro unit — Wheeled equipment for carrying goods, such as a lorry, trailer or semi-trailer, which can be driven or towed onto a vessel or train. Port or vessels’ trailers are included in this definition.
Road — For the purpose of railway accident statistics, any public or private road, street or highway, including adjacent footpaths and bicycle lanes.
Road — For the purpose of Rail Accidents Statistics, any public or private road, street or highway, including footpaths and bicycle lane
Road freight transport — National road freight transport is defined as road transport between two places (a place of loading and a place of unloading) located in the same country by a vehicle registered in that country. International road freight transport is defined as the transport by road between two places (a place of loading and a place of unloading) in two different countries irrespective of the country in which the vehicle is registered. It is composed of 4 categories: International loaded: Place of loading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of unloading in a different country. International unloaded: Place of unloading of goods in reporting country (i.e. country in which the vehicle performing the transport is registered) and place of loading in a different country. Cross-trade Cabotage Total international transport – loaded, unloaded, cross-trade and cabotage - includes transport reported by hauliers registered in reporting countries performed, completely or partially, outside these countries. Transport undertaken by hauliers registered in other countries is not included.
Road freight vehicle — It is a road vehicle designed, exclusively or primarily, to carry goods. Included are: - Light goods road vehicles with a gross vehicle weight of not more than 3 500 kg, designed exclusively or primarily, to carry goods, e.g. vans and pick-ups; - Heavy goods road vehicles with a gross vehicle weight above 3 500 kg, designed, exclusively or primarily, to carry goods; - Road tractors; - Agricultural tractors permitted to use roads open to public traffic.
Road tractor — Road tractor is designed, exclusively or primarily, to haul other road vehicles which are not power-driven (mainly semi-trailers). Agricultural tractors are excluded.
Road train — It is a goods road motor vehicle coupled to a trailer. Articulated vehicle (road tractor coupled to a semi-trailer) with a further trailer attached is included.
Road train — A motor vehicle coupled to a trailer (sometimes referred to in English as a drawbartrailer combination).
Road transport type — There may be different types of transport: - Transport for hire or reward: the carriage for remuneration of persons or goods, on behalf of third parties. - Transport on own account: transport which is not for hire or reward.
Road vehicle — Motor vehicle, articulated vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer within the meaning of ADR, by means of which dangerous goods are carried.
Road-Rail transport — Combined transport by rail and road
Roll away — An unintended and non-powered movement of the train in a direction, which conflicts with the current position of the direction controller in the active desk.
Roll cage, roll container, roll pallet — Small, un-stackable, normally boxy unit on wheels intended to facilitate the loading and unloading of goods.
Roll on - roll off — A roll on - roll off unit, abbreviated as Ro-Ro unit, is a wheeled freight-carrying equipment, such as a lorry, trailer or semi-trailer, which can be driven or towed onto a ship or vessel.
ROLL-ON-ROLL-OFF (RO-RO) — Loading and unloading of a road vehicle, a wagon or an ITU on or off a ship on its own wheels or wheels attached to it for that purpose. In the case of rolling road, only road vehicles are driven on and off a train.
Roller Unit — Roller units for horizontal handling are units which have two side-bearers, one or several front-end grab handling fittings, and one or two pairs of wheels at the rear. They may be loaded on special lorries and convened by road. In this document, the roller units  considered are codified and suitable for wagons with a compatibility code B.
Rolling highway — Transport of complete road vehicles, using roll-on roll-off techniques, on trains normally comprising low-floor wagons throughout. Rolling motorway is a specific type of Piggyback transport. Transport of lorries via Eurotunnel is an example of a rolling road.
Rolling highway (RoLa) — A rolling highway (originating from the German: Rollende Autobahn, also known as Rollende Landstraße and abbreviated as RoLa) is a combined transport system to transport trucks by rail. Special wagons are used in a rolling highway to provide a driveable track along the entire train. During a rolling highway journey, the truck drivers are accommodated in a passenger car with seats or beds. At both ends of the rail link there are purpose-built terminals that allow the train to be easily loaded and unloaded.
Rolling planning — The rolling planning product is aimed at applicants who wish to start and end a train operation irrespective of any timetable change and would like to obtain a timetable of competitive quality.
Rolling road — Transport of complete road vehicles, using roll-on roll-off techniques, on trains comprising low-floor wagons throughout.
Rolling stock — Structural body, command and control system for all train equipment, electric current collection devices, traction and energy conversion units, on-board equipment for electricity consumption measuring and charging, braking, coupling and running gear (bogies, axles, etc.) and suspension, doors, man/machine interfaces (driver, on-board staff and passengers, including accessibility features for persons with disabilities and persons with reduced mobility), passive or active safety devices and requisites for the health of passengers and on-board staff.
Rolling stock — It refers to any railway vehicle that moves exclusively on rails or a tracked transport system. The term includes all powered (for example locomotives) and unpowered vehicles (for example passanger carriages or coaches and goods wagons etc.).
Rolling stock — Rolling stock' is a collective term for the rail fleet; sometimes it is used for one vehicle. It describes all the vehicles that are used on a railway track. It usually includes both powered and unpowered vehicles, for example locomotives, hauled passenger vehicles and freight vehicles (coaches and wagons), diesel units, electric units and service stock. The term is sometimes used to refer only to non-powered vehicles, thus excluding locomotives. The term contrasts with fixed stock (infrastructure), which is a collective term for the track, signals, stations and buildings etc. necessary to operate a railway.
Rolling stock — Railway vehicles covering all types of, or any formation of railway vehicles.
Rolling Stock (RS or RST) — Vehicles which operate on the railway, such as locomotives, freight wagons or coaches.
Rolling stock equipment — Sub-system or component related to rolling stock.
Rolling stock in operation — Rolling stock is in operation when it is registered with “Valid” registration code “00”, in the National Vehicle Register in accordance with Decision 2007/756/EC or in the European Vehicle Register in accordance with Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1614 and maintained in a safe state of running in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/779
Rolling-road wagon — A rail wagon with low floor throughout which, when coupled together, form a rollingroad (cf. 1.4 and 1.7).
ROM — Read-only memory
Round trip journey — A journey from an origin A to a destination B, with return to A via a route different from the one of the outward journey
Route — The particular section or sections of line
Route — The geographical way to be taken from a starting point to a point of destination.
Route — The geographical line to be taken from a starting point to a point of destination.
Route — The particular section or sections of track, from a starting point to a point of destination, prepared for train operation
Route — A specific itinerary linking an origin and a destination, with indication of one or more passing points sufficient to distinguish that itinerary from any other linking the O and D.
Route — UIC definition: Consecutive lines and nodes as a whole between a defined source and target. US definition: A rail route is a line of railroad track between two points on a rail system.
Route Book — Description of the lines and the associated line-side equipment for the lines over which the driver will operate and relevant to the driving task.
Route Book — Description of the lines and the associated line-side equipment for the lines over which the driver will operate and relevant to the driving task.
Route release — The release of route locking.
Route section — A part of a route
Route suitability data — Data transmitted to the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment to allow it to check its ability to run on the track as indicated by the movement authority. It includes data related to loading gauge, traction system and axle load category.
Routine maintenance of flexible IBCs — See Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC)".
Routine maintenance of flexible IBCs — The routine performance on plastics or textile flexible IBCs of operations, such as: (a) Cleaning; or (b) Replacement of non-integral components, such as non-integral liners and closure ties, with components conforming to the manufacturer's original specification; provided that these operations do not adversely affect the containment function of the flexible IBC or alter the design type.
Routine maintenance of rigid IBCs — The routine performance on metal, rigid plastics or composite IBCs of operations such as: (a) Cleaning; (b) Removal and reinstallation or replacement of body closures (including associated gaskets), or of service equipment, conforming to the original manufacturer’s specifications, provided that the leaktightness of the IBC is verified; or (c) Restoration of structural equipment not directly performing a dangerous goods containment or discharge pressure retention function so as to conform to the design type (e.g. the straightening of legs or lifting attachments), provided that the containment function of the IBC is not affected.
Routine maintenance of rigid IBCs — See "Intermediate Bulk Container (IBC)".
Routing station — A station where a train passes by without stopping, that is included in the schedule of that train to help match the timetable data to the tariff data
RP — Abbreviation in B.5 for “Seat with at-seat meal” (Repas à la Place)
RQMS — Railway quality management system
RR — Revision Request
RRA — Revision Request Author
RRD — Retail Reference Data - list of unique identifiers for Locations used in the TAP Retail Architecture procured by designated Governance Entity, centrally stored and accessible by Resource Producers and Resource Consumers in a machine readable format. Can be registered by Governance Entity acting as a Resource Producer. Can be accessed publicly on the ERA website
RS — Rolling Stock
RS — Serbia
RS — Reservation System
RSD — Railway Safety Directive
RSM — Release Speed Monitoring
RST — Rolling Stock
RTD — Research and technological development
RTM — Radio Transmission Module
RTS — Release to Service
RU — Railway Undertaking
RU — See Railway Undertaking
RU — Russian Federation (the)
RU — Railway undertaking
RU — Any public or private undertaking the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail, with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only (from the TAP glossary)
RU (Railway Undertaking) — Any public or private undertaking the principal business of which is to provide services for the transport of goods and/or passengers by rail, with a requirement that the undertaking must ensure traction; this also includes undertakings which provide traction only (from the TAP glossary)
Rule — A requirement applicable in a Member State and to be complied with by the applicant for the authorisation of placing in service of vehicles, where the requirement is related to: - a parameter of the list set out in the Annex to Decision 2009/965/EC, and/or - verification and testing requirements, and/or - a process to be used to gain authorisation for placing in service of vehicles.
Rule on services — A requirement of a general nature relating to the taking-up and pursuit of service activities within the meaning of point (b), in particular provisions concerning the service provider, the services and the recipient of services, excluding any rules which are not specifically aimed at the services defined in that point. For the purposes of this definition: (i) a rule shall be considered to be specifically aimed at Information Society services where, having regard to its statement of reasons and its operative part, the specific aim and object of all or some of its individual provisions is to regulate such services in an explicit and targeted manner; (ii) a rule shall not be considered to be specifically aimed at Information Society services if it affects such services only in an implicit or incidental manner.
Running day / train run — One particular train operation from the origin to the destination. A single running day can consist of more days of operation.
Running gear — Railway vehicle-mounted assembly to support and guide the railway vehicle on the track. Note 1 to entry: The running gear of a railway vehicle comprises wheels/wheelsets, support and suspension elements.
Running safety and dynamics — Requirements to running behaviour and running safety of the vehicle. Included are: tolerance of vehicle to distortion of track, running on curved or twisted tracks, safe running on points and diamond crossings, etc.
Running through phase or system separation sections — Parameter without explanation in the document
Running time — Running time is the time that a train needs to get from one location to another. (Technically calculated as time between departure from first location to arrival to second location). Running time can be either planned (time that train is expected to take) or it can be real one (the actual time taken by train).
Running timetable / running timetable period — The current timetable / timetable period (the timetable in use).
Running Track — Any track used for train service movements. it does not include passing loops and meeting loops on plain line or track connections only required for train operation.
Running track — In railway, it  is a track providing end-to-end line continuity designed for trains between stations or places indicated in tariffs as independent points of departure or arrival for the conveyance of passengers or goods.
RV — Reversing mode
RV — Reversing
RW — Rwanda
S — Severity
S-type Train — Vehicles with independently ([s]eparately) controlled dynamic and train air brakes as an EN/UIC-brake system in accordance with [RD9], chapter 5.4. Typically, a locomotive hauling a train consisting of coaches.
s1 — Stopping distance from beginning of the brake application to rest s2
s2 — Stopping distance from the moment on when Fb = 0.95 FB to rest D
SA — Saudi Arabia
SA — FR: société anonyme
SAARC — South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation
SAD — Single administrative document
SADC — Southern African Development Community
SADT — See "Self-accelerating decomposition temperature"
SAF — Structural adjustment facility
SAFE — SAFE programme (safety actions for Europe) aimed at improving safety, hygiene and health at work, in particular in small and medium-sized enterprises
Safe and secure parking area — A parking area accessible to drivers engaged in the carriage of goods or passengers, meeting the requirements listed in Article 8a(1) of Regulation (EC) No 561/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council (42) and which has been certified in accordance with Union standards and procedures, referred to in Article 8a(2) of that Regulation.
Safe area — A safe area is a temporary survivable space, inside or outside the tunnel, for passengers and staff to find refuge after they have evacuated from a train.
Safe condition sign — Safety sign that indicates an evacuation route, the location of safety equipment or a safety facility, or a safety action.
Safe consist lenght, ETCS — Information about the set of vehicles in rear of and (if any) in front of the engine, taking into account the side of the active cab which defines the front of the engine. The safe consist length information is composed of the six following values: a)        The nominal, min safe and max safe consist lengths in front of the engine, counted from the front end of the engine b)        The nominal, min safe and max safe consist lengths in rear of the engine, counted from the front end of the engine Note: The difference between the min and max safe consist length is related to what is called coupling play and/or to any other uncertainties in the consist length information. It allows to deduce the overall length between the two extremities of a train whose movements can be supervised by the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment: a)     In SM mode, regardless whether there are vehicles in front of the engine b)     In modes where availability of valid Train Data is necessary, in case there is no vehicle in front of the engine
Safe consist length information from on-board necessary  for  access  the  line  and  SIL — Indication  whether  safe  consist  train  length  information  from on-board  is  required to  access the  line for  safety reasons  and the  required  safety  integrity  level
Safe deceleration — The deceleration the train is assumed to achieve with a certain confidence level
Safe integration — The action to ensure the incorporation of an element (e.g. a new vehicle type, network project, subsystem, part, component, constituent, software, procedure, organisation) into a bigger system, does not create an unacceptable risk for the resulting system.
Safe integration — The fulfilment of the essential requirement on safety as specified in Annex III of Directive (EU) 2016/797 when combining parts into its integral whole, such as a vehicle or a subsystem as well as between the vehicle and the network, with regards to the technical compatibility.
Safe observation distance — Distance a person can be from a safety sign while still able to identify the safety sign and have the opportunity to follow the message. Note 1 to entry: Adapted from ISO 3864-2.
Safe state — A condition which continues to preserve safety.
Safety — Freedom from unacceptable risk of harm.
Safety — Freedom from an unacceptable risk of harm. (3) Definitions for other safety related terms are given in reference 3.
Safety — Freedom from unacceptable risk.
Safety — Freedom from unacceptable risk of harm
Safety acceptance — Status given to the change by the proposer based on the safety assessment report provided by the assessment body.
Safety acceptance — The safety acceptance process and the associated terms are given in reference 4.
Safety assessment report — The document containing the conclusions of the assessment performed by an assessment body on the system under assessment.
Safety authorisation — The authorisation issued to an infrastructure manager by a competent authority in accordance with Article 11 of Directive 2004/49/EC.
Safety barrier — A safety barrier is a physical, engineered system or human action (e.g., specific procedures, administrative controls) planned in advance to prevent, control, or mitigate undesired events or accidents. They can avert the progression of a potential accident scenario or alter the outcome so that effects are less severe. The safety barrier directly serves the safety function.
Safety certificate — Certificate issued to a railway undertaking by a competent authority in accordance with Article 10 of Directive 2004/49/EC.
Safety Certificate — The document attesting, in accordance with the laws and prescriptions in force in that State, in which the infrastructure is located, that so far as concerns the carrier, - the internal organisation of the undertaking as well as - the personnel to be employed and the vehicles to be used on the infrastructure, meet the requirements imposed in respect of safety in order to ensure a service without a danger on that infrastructure
Safety certificate — DIRECTIVE 2016/798/EU: ‘The purpose of the safety certificate is to provide evidence that the railway undertaking has established its safety management system and is able to operate safely in the intended area of operation.’ Also, EU legislation has introduced the mutual recognition of safety certificates delivered in the Member States. OTIF definition: 'document attesting, in accordance with the laws and prescriptions in force in the State in which the infrastructure is located, that so far as concerns the carrier, - the internal organisation of the undertaking as well as - the personnel to be employed and the vehicles to be used on the infrastructure, meet the requirements imposed in respect of safety in order to ensure a service without danger on that infrastructure'.
Safety certification body — The body responsible for issuing a single safety certificate, either the Agency or a national safety authority.
Safety chain — A safety management approach where the safe operation of a shared system consists of a chain where each actor is expected to act as planned, before, during and after the occurrence of the considered risk situation.
Safety colour — Colour with special properties to which a safety meaning is attributed.
Safety colour — Specific colour with special properties to which a safety meaning is attributed.
Safety critical components — The definition provided for in section 4.2.12.1 of Annex to Commission Regulation (EU) No 1302/2014 (7).
Safety culture — The interaction between the requirements of the safety management system, how people make sense of them, based on their attitudes, values and beliefs and what they actually do, as seen in decisions and behaviours. A positive safety culture is characterised by a collective commitment by leaders and individuals to always act safely, in particular when confronted with competing goals (Regulation (EU) 2018/762).
Safety enhancement plan — A schedule to implement the organisational structure, responsibilities, procedures, activities, capabilities and resources required to reduce the risk for one or more risk categories.
Safety function — A safety function is the specific action performed by the safety barrier (e.g., close the valve, stop the process, etc.).
Safety Information — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. Safety information is information that shall be given to passengers so that they know in advance how they have to behave in case of an emergency
Safety Instructions — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. Safety instructions are the instructions that shall be given to passengers in case of an emergency so that they understand what to do.
Safety integrity level (SIL) — One of a number of defined discrete levels for specifying the safety integrity requirements of the safety functions to be allocated to the safety (3.1.1.11) related systems
Safety life cycle — The safety life cycle is defined in reference 4.
Safety management system — The organisation, arrangements and procedures established by an infrastructure manager or a railway undertaking to ensure the safe management of its operations.
Safety management system — The organisation, arrangements and procedures established by an infrastructure manager or a railway undertaking to ensure the safe management of its operations (Directive (EU) 2016/798).
Safety Management System (SMS) — A set of rules, processes and procedures that infrastructure managers and railway undertakings are required to establish in order to control all risks related to their activities and ensure a safe management of their operations on a continuous basis.
Safety management system(s) — The organisational arrangements established by an organisation to ensure the safe management of its operations.
Safety marking — Marking which adopts the use of safety colours and safety contrast colours to convey a safety message or render an object or location conspicuous.
Safety measures — A set of actions either reducing the frequency of occurrence of a hazard or mitigating its consequences in order to achieve and/or maintain an acceptable level of risk.
Safety requirements — Safety requirements for ETCS DMI functions for the set of specifications No 1 in Table A2 of the Annex A to the CCS TSI laid down in Decision 2012/88/EU.
Safety requirements — The safety characteristics (qualitative or quantitative, or when needed both qualitative and quantitative) necessary for the design, operation (including operational rules) and maintenance of a system in order to meet legal or company safety targets.
Safety requirements for braking at train level — Parameter without explanation in the document
Safety sign — Sign which gives a general safety message, obtained by a combination of a colour and geometric shape and which, by the addition of a graphical symbol, gives a particular safety message.
Safety sign — Sign giving a general safety message, obtained by a combination of a colour and geometric shape and which, by the addition of a graphical symbol, gives a particular safety message.
Safety valve — A spring-loaded device which is activated automatically by pressure the purpose of which is to protect the tank against unacceptable excess internal pressure.
Safety-critical task — Task, affecting railway safety, performed by staff preparing, operating, controlling or otherwise involved in the movement of trains.
Safety-related — Carries responsibility for safety (3.1.1.11)
SAIT — Safety Alert IT-Tool
Sales conditions — Set of rules defining how an IRT ticket can be sold (how much time before departure, to whom, by which distribution channel, etc.)
SALT — Strategic arms limitation talks
Salvage packaging — A special packaging into which damaged, defective, leaking or non-conforming dangerous goods packages, or dangerous goods that have spilled or leaked are placed for purposes of carriage for recovery or disposal.
Salvage pressure receptacle — A pressure receptacle with a water capacity not exceeding 3 000 litres into which are placed damaged, defective, leaking or non-conforming pressure receptacle(s) for the purpose of carriage e.g. for recovery or disposal.
Sanding system — Parameter without explanation in the document
SAPT — See "Self-accelerating polymerization temperature"
SARL — FR: société à responsabilité limitée
Satcen — European Union Satellite Centre
SAVE — Specific actions for vigorous energy efficiency
SB — Service Brake or in the context of modes, Stand By mode
SB — Solomon Islands
SBB — Schweizerische Bundesbahnen – Swiss Federal Railways
SBD — Service Brake Deceleration Curve
SBI — Service Brake Intervention supervision limit
SC — Standard Committee
SC — Seychelles
SCAD — Automated central documentation service (database) (FR: service central automatisé de documentation)
SCC — Safety Critical Components
SCC — Safety-critical components
SCC — Safety Critical Components
Scenario — Assumed sequence of events. See also “Hazardous scenario”.
SCENT — System for a customs enforcement network
SCF — Scientific Committee on Food
Schedule — The timetable data related to a specific train, with its origin, transit and destination stations and the corresponding times of departure, arrival and passage
Scheduled stop — Planned stop for commercial or operational reasons.
Scheduled time of arrival (STA) — No TAF TSI definition available. STA is the time of arrival according to the published schedule expressed in a 6-cipher code (where the first two ciphers indicate the date, the next two the hour and the last two the minutes).
Scheduled time of departure — Date and Time of departure for which the path is requested.
Scheduled time of departure (STD) — TAF TSI definition: 'Date and time of departure for which the path is requested.' Here 'requested' means allocated/assigned, since a RU requests a time that an IM then assigns. General definition: the time of departure according to the published schedule.
Scheduled Timetable — Chronologically defined occupation of rail infrastructure for a train movement on open line or in stations. Changes to the timetables will be supplied by the IM s at least 2 days before the commencement of the day when the train departs from its origin. This timetable applies to a specific day. Known in some countries as the Operational Timetable.
Schematic overview of the operational point — Document providing the schematic overview of the operation al  point
Schematic overview of the operational point in digital form — The  existence  of  a  schematic  overview  of  the  operational point  in  digital  form
Scope of ECM certification — The scope of the ECM certification (point 5 of forms as in Annex IV of ECM Regulation) generally includes; -	categories of vehicles In case of certification of outsourced maintenance function, or parts thereof, it is complemented in the related form of Annex IV of ECM Regulation by compiling point 6 with: -	appropriate function/s covered and, if only parts of a function are covered,  -	the processes/sub-functions of the related function (points of the relevant section of the function as in Annex II of ECM Regulation) -	limitation indicating processes/parts of vehicle or component covered/excluded.
SD — Sudan (the)
SDI — Strategic defence initiative
SDR — The agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road, including all special agreements signed by those states involved in the transport operation.
SDR — Special drawing right (IMF)
SdT — FR: service de traduction (European Commission; replaced by the Directorate-General for Translation)
SE — Sweden
SEAFO — South-East Atlantic Fisheries Organisation
Seat-kilometre offered — Unit of measurement representing the movement of one seat available in a passenger railway vehicle when performing the services for which it is primarily intended over one kilometre. The distance to be considered is that actually travelled. Shunting and other similar movements are excluded.
Second alternative offer — Second alternative timetable including path details that is offered in the path alteration process in case any of the involved applicants disagree with the alternative offer and do not reject the first offer, but ask for adaptation.
Second-best (option, policy) — One that does not correspond to the theoretically optimum solution but is the best of the available non-optimal policies/measures.
Secondary critical event (SCE) - right-side — In Bow-tie Terminology: An event following the critical event (for example, the formation of a pool after a breach on a vessel).
Secondary line — A secondary line (or branch line) is a line of less importance than a main line (or trunk line).
Section — A part of the movement authority.
Section coupon — A ticket for a domestic journey sold as foreign sale
Section of line (SoL) — The part of line between adjacent operational points that may consist of several tracks.
Section timer — The timer associated with a section as part of the movement authority. When the timer reaches a value defined by the trackside equipment the section is no longer available and the movement authority for the train is reduced accordingly.
Section with train detection limitation — Specific for route compatibility check on French network.
Sectioning locations — Electrical equipment located at intermediate locations between substations to supply and parallel contact lines and to provide protection, isolation and auxiliary supplies.
Sector Forum Rail (SFR) — Joint co-ordination group of CEN, CENELEC and ETSI with participation of railway stakeholder organisations and in cooperation with the EC and the Agency.
Sectoral Social Dialogue (SSD) — Instrument of political governance aiming to foster dialogue between the social partners at a European level, acting as a forum for consultation on the drafting of EU policies on employment and social affairs.
Securing — Measures to be applied to avoid unintentional movement of railway vehicles.
Securing — Measures  to  be  applied  to  avoid  unintentional  movement  of  railway vehicles.
Security — The protection resulting from all measures, also administrative ones, to prevent accidental or malicious modification or disclosure of data; for key management, the protection generally guarantees confidentiality, authenticity and integrity of keys.
Security background — Background printed on paper documents to provide protection against forgeries, copies and alterations.
Security certificate — Specially coded feature for IRTHP and e-tickets. The security certificate, in the form of a 2D barcode is an additional security feature
Security feature — Features of different types to protect paper documents from forgeries, copies and alterations.
Security in data — A type of fulfilment where the authenticity of the ticket is guaranteed by extra data present on the ticket, generated from different elements on the ticket. The controlling staff can interpret this extra data locally visually or with the help of a device, without need of a remote system.
Security in media — A type of fulfilment where the authenticity of the ticket is guaranteed by the support itself e.g. paper, plastic card, etc.
Security in system — A type of fulfilment where the authenticity of the ticket is guaranteed by data present in a remote system - possibly copied on a local device - that the controlling staff can access by means of a reference present on the ticket
Security in the Commission — The security of persons, assets and information in the Commission, and in particular the physical integrity of persons and assets, the integrity, confidentiality and availability of information and communication and information systems, as well as the unobstructed functioning of Commission operations.
Security of network and information systems — The ability of network and information systems to resist, at a given level of confidence, any event that may compromise the availability, authenticity, integrity or confidentiality of stored, transmitted or processed data or of the services offered by, or accessible via, those network and information systems.
SEDOC — European system for the international clearing of vacancies and applications for employment (see EURES)
SEG — Segment
Segment — A zone of a transport infrastructure for which the values of parameters that are necessary for estimating the risks with the harmonized model are set. A segment can be used for describing the infrastructure itself, the operations performed in the considered segment, and the vulnerabilities to be considered on or in the vicinity of the infrastructure. In a given segment, only one value can be allocated to each parameter of a template. See also (description) templates.
Segment Profile — A Segment Profile is a one-dimensional object that describes a single and consecutive section of track and corresponds to the Track Centreline of that section of track. A Segment Profile has a Start Point and an End Point, which correspond to the boundary points of the section of Track Centreline of that Segment Profile.
Self-accelerating decomposition temperature (SADT) — The lowest temperature at which self-accelerating decomposition may occur in a substance in the packaging, IBC or tank as offered for carriage. The SADT shall be determined in accordance with the test procedures given in Part II, Section 28 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria.
Self-accelerating polymerization temperature (SAPT) — The lowest temperature at which self-accelerating polymerization may occur with a substance in the packaging, IBC or tank as offered for carriage. The SAPT shall be determined in accordance with the test procedures established for the self-accelerating decomposition temperature for self-reactive substances in accordance with Part II, section 28 of the Manual of Tests and Criteria.
Self-operating ventilation valve — A venting device on shells with bottom discharge which is connected to the bottom valve and in normal operation is only opened during loading or unloading for the ventilation of shells.
Self-supply of services — A situation where a railway undertaking performs itself a rail-related service on the premises of a service facility operator, provided that access to and the use of the facility by that railway undertaking for self-supply of services is legally and technically feasible, does not endanger the safety of the operations and the operator of the service facility concerned offers such possibility.
Selling — See Booking
Semi-Continuous transmission — Transmission taking place over a defined distance.
Semi-trailer — Non powered road vehicle which is transported by rail loaded on fixed-recess wagons (pocket wagons). In this document, the semi-trailer is meant to be suitable for handling by crane. It is handled by gantry cranes or mobile transhipment equipment by the  grappler pockets using grabs and lifted and loaded on the pocket wagons (vertical transhipment). In this document, the semi-trailers considered are codified and suitable for wagons with a compatibility code P.
Semi-trailer — It is goods road vehicle with no front axle designed in such way that part of the vehicle and a substantial part of its loaded weight rests on a road tractor.
Semi-trailer — A non-powered vehicle for the carriage of goods, intended to be coupled to a motor vehicle in such a way that a substantial part of its weight and of its load is borne by the motor vehicle. Semi-trailers may have to be specially adapted for use in combined transport.
Semi-trailer — Any vehicle intended to be coupled to a motor vehicle in such a way that part of it rests on the motor vehicle with a substantial part of its weight and of the weight of its load being borne by the motor vehicle, and constructed and equipped for the carriage of goods.
Separation sections — Equipment required to provide the transition between electrically different systems or between different phases of the same electrical system.
Sequence diagram — In a Unified Modelling Language (UML) a sequence diagram is a kind of interaction diagram that shows how processes operate with one another and in what order.
Series — A number of identical vehicles of a design type.
Series — An itinerary linking an origin and a destination station along a specific route
Serious accident — Any train collision or derailment of trains resulting in the death of at least one person or serious injuries to five or more persons or extensive damage to rolling stock, the infrastructure or the environment, and any other accident with the same consequences which has an obvious impact on railway safety Regulation or the management of safety; ‘extensive damage’ means damage that can be immediately assessed by the investigating body to cost at least EUR 2 million in total
Serious accident — Any train collision or derailment of trains, resulting in the death of at least one person or serious injuries to five or more persons or extensive damage to rolling stock, the railway infrastructure or the environment, and any other similar accident with an obvious impact on railway safety regulation or the management of safety; “extensive damage” means damage that can immediately be assessed by the investigating body to cost at least 1.8 million SDR in total.
Serious injury (seriously injured person) — Any person injured who was hospitalised for more than 24 hours as a result of an accident, excluding any attempted suicide.
Serious injury accident — Any accident involving at least one rail vehicle in motion, resulting in at least one killed or seriously injured person. Accidents in workshops, warehouses and depots are excluded. This definition is normally used by the UIC for railway accidents and excludes the accidents with slightly injured persons. Figures collected under this definition cannot be compared directly to the number of road accidents which includes accidents with slightly injured persons.
Service — See Transport service
Service — Any Information Society service, that is to say, any service normally provided for remuneration, at a distance, by electronic means and at the individual request of a recipient of services. For the purposes of this definition:  (i) ‘at a distance’ means that the service is provided without the parties being simultaneously present; (ii) ‘by electronic means’ means that the service is sent initially and received at its destination by means of electronic equipment for the processing (including digital compression) and storage of data, and entirely transmitted, conveyed and received by wire, by radio, by optical means or by other electromagnetic means; (iii) ‘at the individual request of a recipient of services’ means that the service is provided through the transmission of data on individual request.
Service — A passenger rail transport service that operates between rail stations according to a timetable, including transport services offered for re-routing.
Service — Any self-employed economic activity normally provided for remuneration, as defined in Article 57 TFEU.
Service — Result of at least one activity necessarily performed at the interface between supplier and the customer, which is generally tangible
Service brake — The brake performance of a train or a unit is its ability to decelerate. It is the result of the braking power available to decelerate the train or unit within defined limits and all factors involved in the conversion and dissipation of energy including train resistance.
Service brake command, ETCS — The ERTMS/ETCS service brake command results in the train applying the full service braking effort.
Service braking — Application of an adjustable brake force in order to control the speed of the train, including stop and temporary immobilisation.
Service braking command — Requirements concerning the service braking command, e.g. specifications to the adjustability of the brake force by the service braking command, requirement of only one available service braking command and possibility to isolate the service braking function of the other service braking command(s), automatic cut-off of all tractive effort by the service braking command.
Service braking performance — Requirements concerning the service braking performance, e.g. level and limit the maximum service braking performance.
Service brand — A code, and the corresponding definition, identifying a commercial family of trains (e.g. AVE, Thalys, RailJet). Valid values are listed in ERA Code list B.4.7009 (together with Service modes)
Service contract — A contract covering all intellectual and non-intellectual services other than those covered by supply contracts, works contracts and building contracts.
Service Disruption — The unplanned stop of a train during operation, without any information regarding the continuation of the journey
Service equipment — (a) of the tank means filling and discharge, breather, safety, heating and heat insulating devices and measuring instruments; NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7. (b) of the elements of a battery-wagon or of a MEGC means filling and discharge devices, including the manifold, safety devices and measuring instruments; (c) of an IBC means the filling and discharge devices and any pressure-relief or venting, safety, heating and heat insulating devices and measuring instruments; (d) of a pressure receptacle, means closures, manifolds, piping, porous, absorbent or absorbent material and any structured devices, e.g. for handling.
Service extra — A code, and the corresponding definition, identifying a service offered by an RU on board of its trains (e.g. lunch, movies). Valid values are listed in ERA Code list B.4.7161
Service facility — The installation, including ground area, building and equipment, which has been specially arranged, as a whole or in part, to allow the supply of one or more services referred to in points 2 to 4 of Annex II.
Service facility — A code, and the corresponding definition, identifying an accommodation available on a train (e.g. First-class seats, Second- class sleeper T4) or a utility available in a station (e.g. Metro connection, Bus connection). Valid values are listed in ERA Code list B.4.9039
Service facility — DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU: 'The installation, including ground area, building and equipment, which has been specially arranged, as a whole or in part, to allow the supply of one or more services referred to in points 2 to 4 of Annex II' (services to be supplied to the railway undertakings)
Service facility capacity — The potential to use a service facility and supply a service over a given period of time, taking into account the time needed to access and leave the service facility.
Service facility description — A cdocument which lays down detailed information necessary for access to service facilities and rail-related services.
Service fee — Charge which may be made by the issuing undertaking for issuing the ticket. It may be shown on the ticket itself (included in the total or additional to the fare proper) or receipted on a separate document
Service life — For composite cylinders and tubes, means the number of years the cylinder or tube is permitted to be in service.
Service mode — A code, and the corresponding definition, identifying a generic type of train (e.g. Intercity, Regional) or a transport mode different from Train (e.g. Bus, Ship). Valid values are listed in ERA Code list B.4.7009 (together with Service brands)
Service number — The number identifying a given transport service (train or coach group) offered in the timetable of an operator
Service Provider — Responsible carrier for this specific transport stage. Party who receives and handles the booking.
Service provider — The responsible entity providing any services linked to the transport of passengers.
Service provider — The responsible entity providing any services linked to the transport of passengers. The service provider is responsible for the terms and conditions and for the fares valid on the service and is often identical with the operating carrier.
Servicing — Parameter without explanation in the document
SESAR — The SESAR project is the European air traffic control infrastructure modernisation programme. SESAR aims at developing the new generation air traffic management system capable of ensuring the safety and fluidity of air transport worldwide over the next 30 years.
SESAR — New generation European air traffic management system
SESAR project — The project to modernise air traffic management in Europe, aimed at providing the Union with a high performance, standardised and interoperable air traffic management infrastructure, and consisting in an innovation cycle that includes the SESAR definition phase, the SESAR development phase and the SESAR deployment phase.
Session, communication — The process of initiating and terminating an applicative dialogue between trackside and on-board via radio.
Set Speed — This is an input received from a function external to ETCS for display to the driver. It represents the speed value to which the train speed is regulated by an external device (e.g. by a cruise control system).
Settled pressure — The pressure of the contents of a pressure receptacle in thermal and diffusive equilibrium.
Severance effect — Separation of adjacent areas by road or rail infrastructure, causing negative impact on human beings (e.g. restricted access to shopping, recreational, etc. facilities) or on flora and fauna (e.g. constriction of habitat). Also called barrier or separation effect.
Severity — Intensity of harm. Within this framework the severity is estimated by the exposure of vulnerabilities to hazardous areas.
SF — System Failure mode
SG — Singapore
SGML — Standard generalised markup language
SH — Shunting mode
SH — Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha
SH — Shunting
Shadow price — The marginal opportunity cost of the use of a resource (i.e. the loss of benefits if this resource cannot be used for the next best purpose).
Shall — That the definition is an absolute requirement of the specification
Shall — Is mandatory.
Shared IT service — The service a CIS provides to other CISs in the processing of information.
Shared Management — One of the three forms of implementation of the EU budget, based on management of an EU fund or programme delegated to EU Member States. This applies to the vast majority of EU funded projects
Sheeted bulk container — An open top bulk container with rigid bottom (including hopper-type bottom), side and end walls and a non-rigid covering.
Sheeted bulk container — See "Bulk container"
Sheeted container — An open container equipped with a sheet to protect the goods loaded.
Sheeted container — See "Container"
Sheeted wagon — An open wagon provided with a sheet to protect the load.
Shelf life control — Technique aimed at ensuring that the inventory is not overaged or regarded as unserviceable for the purposes for which it was originally manufactured. EXAMPLE:First-in-first-out (FIFO), monitoring of shelf life.
Shell — (For tanks) The part of the tank which retains the substance intended for carriage, including openings and their closures, but does not include service equipment or external structural equipment. NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7.
Shelter — A structure with a roof for weather protection but not necessarily walls." A simple shelter on a platform is not to be understood as a waiting area unless it has all above characteristics.
Shift work — Any method of organising work in shifts whereby workers succeed each other at the same work stations according to a certain pattern, including a rotating pattern, and which may be continuous or discontinuous, entailing the need for workers to work at different times over a given period of days or weeks.
Shift worker — Any worker whose work schedule is part of shift work.
Ship losses — It refers to vessels that cease to exist after an incident because they were either not recoverable following the incident, or they were dismantled after recovery.
Shipment — Wagons or intermodal loading units transported under the terms of a single consignment, irrespective of the quantity or number of containers, packages, or pieces. Also called consignment.
Shipper — The contracting party (person or company) entitled to give orders and instructions about its shipment to the accepting (issuing) carrier, simultaneously assuming full responsibility for any charges arising, until the moment the consignee has signed for receipt.
Shipper — A legal entity or a natural or legal person who is named on the bill of lading or on an equivalent transport document, such as a ‘through’ bill of lading, as the shipper and/or in whose name or on whose behalf a contract of carriage has been concluded with the transport company.
Shipper/consignor/sender — A person or company who puts goods in the care of others (forwarding agent/freight forwarder, carrier/transport operator) to be delivered to a consignee.  In the definition, a person means either a physical or legal person or a company.
Short notice path request — Individual request for a path according to Directive 2012/34/EU, due to additional transport demands or operational needs.
Short notice path request — The individual request for a path according to Article 23 of Directive 2001/14/EC due to additional transport demands or operational needs
Short sea shipping — Movement of cargo by sea between ports situated in Europe as well as between ports in Europe and ports situated in non-European countries having a coastline on the enclosed seas bordering Europe.
Short sea shipping (SSS) — Short sea shipping, abbreviated as SSS, is the maritime transport of goods over relatively short distances, as opposed to the intercontinental cross-ocean deep sea shipping. In the context of European Union (EU) transport statistics it is defined as maritime transport of goods between ports in the EU (sometimes also including candidate countries and EFTA countries) on one hand, and ports situated in geographical Europe, on the Mediterranean and Black Seas on the other hand, i.e. ports in - EU maritime countries; - EEA maritime countries (Iceland and Norway); - candidate countries; - the Baltic Sea area (Russia); - the Mediterranean Sea area (Algeria, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Occupied Palestinian territory, Syria, and Tunisia); - the Black Sea area (Georgia, Moldova, Russia and Ukraine). This definition is derived from Commission Communication COM (1999) 317 final of June 1999 on the development of SSS in Europe (page 2). As a result, short sea shipping also includes feeder services: a short-sea network between ports with the objective of consolidating or redistributing freight to or from a deep sea service in one of these ports, the so-called hub port.
Short Term — Short term means a process when performed within a period which is less than 7 days
Short Term processes — See Regular vs. Short Term processes
Short-sea shipping — The movement of cargo and passengers by sea between ports situated in geographical waters of one or several Member States or between a port situated in waters of Member States and a port situated in waters of an adjacent third country having a coastline on the seas bordering waters of one or several Member States.
Should — This word, or the adjective ‘RECOMMENDED’, mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular item, but the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before choosing a different course.
Should — Is recommended.
Should not — This phrase, or the phrase ‘NOT RECOMMENDED’ mean that there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behaviour is acceptable or even useful, but the full implications should be understood and the case carefully weighed before implementing any behaviour described with this label.
Shunter — Traction unit designed for use only on shunting yards, stations and depots.
Shunter — A traction unit designed for use only on shunting yards, stations and depots. Sometimes also referred to as switcher
Shunting — Operation of moving a rail vehicle or set of rail vehicles inside a railway station or other railway installations (depot, workshop, marshalling yard, etc.).
Shunting — Eurostat/ITF/UNECE definition: operation of moving a rail vehicle or set of rail vehicles inside a railway station or other railway installations (depot, workshop, marshalling yard, etc.). General definition: the movement of rail vehicles, usually within a shunting yard or similar, to rearrange them for whatever reason. For example, freight trains that consist of single wagon loads must be made into trains and divided according to their destinations. Thus the cars must be shunted several times along their route (in contrast to a block train, which carries, for example, automobiles from the plant to a port, or coal from a mine to the power plant). This shunting is done partly at the start and end destinations and partly (for long-distance-hauling) in marshalling yards. According to EU legislation, shunting is to be supplied to the Railway Undertaking. Where an Infrastructure Manager offers this service, it shall supply it upon request. One problem here is the definition of 'shunting services', which varies from country to country, is more or less finely differentiated, and may include: access and use of the installations for the formation of trains, train marshalling, shunting engines (both for shunting freight wagons and for reversing passenger trains) and the parking of rolling stock.
Shunting composition — A traction unit coupled or not to a set of vehicles and intended to be moved under shunting conditions without train data.
Shunting mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment operating mode which allows the train to move in shunting, without available train data.
Shunting movement — Way of moving vehicles without train data and controlled by shunting orders.
Shunting movement — The movement of trains or vehicles other than normal passage along running lines. When vehicles are moved without train data available.
Shunting movement — Way  of  moving  vehicles  without  train  data  and  controlled  by  shunting orders.
Shunting signal — A signal provided for shunting movements only. A fixed signal intended for shunting movements. In some cases Shunting signals at danger are valid also for train movements.
Shunting yard — Location equipped for shunting operations.
SI — Slovenia
SICAV — FR: société d’investissement à capital variable
Siding — Any track(s) within an operational point which is not used for operational routing of a train.
Sidings — Tracks branching off running main tracks/lines. The length of sidings is included in the length of tracks if the sidings are publicly accessible and managed by the infrastructure manager, private sidings being exclude
SIENA — Trade database based on Nimexe (Eurostat) (FR: système intérimaire d’exploitation de la Nimexe automatisé)
Sift-proof packaging — A packaging impermeable to dry contents, including fine solid material produced during carriage.
Sign height — Diameter of a circular geometric shape or height of a rectangular or triangular geometric shape.
Signal — A visual display device that conveys instructions or provides advance warning of instructions regarding the driver’s authority to proceed.
Signal location — The geographical location of a signal.
Signal Passed at Danger when passing a danger point — Any occasion when any part of a train proceeds beyond its authorised movement and travels beyond the danger point.
Signal Passed at Danger without passing a danger point — Any occasion when any part of a train proceeds beyond its authorised movement but does not travel beyond the danger point.
Signaller — Staff in charge of the route setting of trains /shunting compositions and of issuing instructions to drivers.
Signalling system — Particular kind of system used on a railway to control and protect the operation of trains.
Signalling system — Railway signalling is a system used to control railway traffic safely, essentially to prevent trains from colliding. The main purpose of signalling is to maintain a safe distance at all times between all trains on the running lines. The secondary aim - particularly today - is to make the best use possible of the railway infrastructure, so that the total throughput of trains meets business requirements. There are 'fixed block signalling systems' and the more modern 'moving block signalling systems', which increases line capacity.
Signatory — A natural person who creates an electronic signature.
Significant accident — Any accident involving at least one rail vehicle in motion, resulting in at least one killed or seriously injured person, or in significant damage to stock, track, other installations or environment, or extensive disruptions to traffic, excluding accidents in workshops, warehouses and depots.
Significant accident — Any accident involving at least one rail vehicle in motion, resulting in at least one killed or seriously injured person, or in significant damage to stock, track, other installations or environment, or extensive disruptions to traffic. Accidents in workshops, warehouses and depots are excluded. This definition is used by the UIC (Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer).
Significant accident — (Railway mode only) Any accident involving at least one rail vehicle in motion, resulting in at least one killed or seriously injured person, or in significant damage to stock, track, other installations or environment, or extensive disruption to traffic, excluding accidents in workshops, warehouses and depots.
Significant cyber threat — A cyber threat which, based on its technical characteristics, can be assumed to have the potential to have a severe impact on the network and information systems of an entity or the users of the entity’s services by causing considerable material or non-material damage.
Significant damage to stock, track, other installations or environment — Damage that is equivalent to EUR 150 000 or more.
Significant damage to stock, track, other installations or environment — Damage that exceeds an internationally agreed threshold. The threshold for significant damage, adopted by the UIC, was set at EUR 150 000 in 2007.
Signs and information — Requirements concerning signs, pictograms and displayed text. Including safety instructions to passengers and emergency markings for passengers.
SIL — Safety Integrity Level
SIL — Safety integrity level
Silo wagon — Wagons for the transport in bulk of powdered products such as cement, flour, plaster, etc.
SIMAP — Information system for public procurement
Simultaneous use of two means of transport (active mode)/ (passive mode) — Intermodal transport of goods using two modes of transport simultaneously, where one (passive) means of transport is carried on another (active) means of transport which provides traction and consumes energy, e.g. Rail/road transport, sea/road transport and sea/rail transport. Piggyback transport is a synonym for rail/road transport.
Single European Railway Area Committee (SERAC) — Committee that is composed of Member States and chaired by the Commission. It was set up a few years ago as a mechanism of control of the Commission which enjoys powers to enact legislation without going through the normal procedure i.e. consulting the Parliament and the Council.
Single European sky or SES — The systems established under Regulation (EC) No 549/2004 (37) (EC) No 550/2004 (38), (EC) No 551/2004 (39), and (EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council to reinforce air traffic safety standards, to contribute to the sustainable development of the air transport system and to improve the overall performance of air traffic management and air navigation services for general air traffic in Europe.
Single on-board location reference — The SOLR is the balise group used by ERTMS/ETCS on-board as unique location reference to supervise all location items against the train position.
Single track — A single-track railway is one where traffic in both directions shares the same track.
Single variation — A service that is described with only one POP segment
Single wagon train — EC definition: 'Single wagon trains are assembled in a marshalling yard in the region of origin, transported to a marshalling yard in the region of destination and disassembled into single wagon loads for transport to their final destination (often by intermodal transport). The provision of single wagon services requires a more complex organisational structure, a large rail network and a sufficient scale of operations.'
Single wagon train service — A distinction is often made between block train services and single wagon train services. The majority of customers and competitors perceive these two types of rail freight transport services as not substitutable. Choosing one rather than the other depends mainly on the quantity of goods to be transported.
SIRI — Service Interface for Real Time Information SIRI is an XML protocol to allow distributed computers to exchange real-time information about public transport services and vehicles. SIRI is based on the Transmodel abstract model for public transport information
SIS — Schengen information system
SITC — Standard international trade classification
SITC/Rev.4 — Standard International Trade Classification, Statistical Papers, Series M, No. 34/Rev. 4, United Nations, 2006
Site — Location of an organization, having activities related to industrial products and services
Size of friction element — Product of height and width of the friction element without any correction for grooves
Sizes of containers — The main sizes of containers are: a)	20 foot ISO container (length of 20 feet and width of 8 feet); b)	40 foot ISO container (length of 40 feet and width of 8 feet); c)	ISO container over 20 feet and under 40 feet of length; d)	ISO container over 40 feet long; e)	Super high cube container (oversize container); f)	Air container (container conforming to standards laid down for air transportation). Containers are normally 8 feet high but other heights also exist. ‘High-cube containers’ are containers with a height of 9.5 feet. ‘Super high cube containers’ are containers exceeding the ISO dimensions. They include container lengths of 45 feet, 48 feet and 53 feet. Containers sizes classified under a) to e) are referred to as large containers.
SJ — Svalbard and Jan Mayen
SK — Slovakia
sk — Slovak
Skills — The ability to apply knowledge and use know-how to complete tasks and solve problems. In the context of the EQF, skills are described as cognitive (involving the use of logical, intuitive and creative thinking) or practical (involving manual dexterity and the use of methods, materials, tools and instruments)
SL — Sleeping mode
SL — Sierra Leone
sl — Slovenian
Slave engine — Any engine that is not the leading Rolling Stock unit of a train or shunting consist. The ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment of the slave engine runs in one of the modes in which it is not controlling the movement of the train/shunting consist (non leading mode, sleeping mode, passive shunting mode).
Sleeping mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that is used for the on-board equipment in slave engines controlled by a leading engine.
SM — Supervised Manoeuvre mode
SM — San Marino
Small container — A container which has an internal volume of not more than 3 m3.
Small container — See "Container"
Small receptacle containing gas (gas cartridge) — A non-refillable receptacle having a water capacity not exceeding 1000 ml for receptacles made of metal and not exceeding 500 ml for receptacles made of synthetic material or glass, containing, under pressure, a gas or a mixture of gases. It may be fitted with a valve.
SMART — Specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, time framed
Smart recharging — A recharging operation in which the intensity of electricity delivered to the battery is adjusted in real-time, based on information received through electronic communication.
SME — Small and medium-sized enterprise
SMGS — agreement on International Goods Transport by Rail of the Organization for Cooperation between Railways (OSJD), Warsaw.
SMGS Annex 2 — A provisions for the carriage of dangerous goods as Annex 2 to SMGS.
SMIC — FR: salaire minimal interprofessionnel de croissance
SMIG — FR: salaire minimal interprofessionnel garanti
Smoke obscuration — Reduction, usually expressed as a percentage, in the intensity of light due to its passage through smoke.
Smoke production — Integral of the smoke production rate over the time interval being considered.
Smoke production rate — Product of the volumetric flow rate of smoke and the extinction coefficient of the smoke at the point of measurement.
SMS — Safety Management System
SMS — Safety management system
SMU — Small and medium-sized undertaking
SN — National System
SN — System National mode
SN — Senegal
SNCB — Societe National des Chemins de fer Belges
SNCF — Societe National des Chemins de fer Français – French State Railways
Snow, ice and hail — Requirements to prevent vehicles from degradation for snow, ice and hail conditions. What ‘snow, ice and hail’ conditions have to be considered, scenarios like snowdrift, powder snow, snowfall of large quantities of light snow with low water equivalent content, temperature and humidity variation during one single run causing ice build-ups shall be taken into account. To define if capability to remove snow in front of the train is needed. To consider possible consequence of snow/ice on running stability, brake function and brake power supply, needs for windscreen's equipment, providing the driver with acceptable climate for working.
SO — Somalia
Social cost-benefit analysis — Systematic estimation of all costs and benefits of a project that are relevant to society. Includes both technological externalities and pecuniary externalities, as long as the latter are not merely redistribution of income.
Social costs — The sum total of internal and external costs.
Social networking services platform — A platform that enables end-users to connect, share, discover and communicate with each other across multiple devices, in particular via chats, posts, videos and recommendations.
Societal concerns — The concern and anxiety that the public feels about different types of risk. It might not reflect the factual level of risk and can fluctuate as a result of, for example, media coverage.
Societal risk — Risk that all potentially involved persons come to harm Also called “Grouped fatality risk”.
Societal risk indicator — Cumulative probability per year that at least several people are killed.  Societal risk is generally visualised with the help of F/N curves.  The integral of F/N curves corresponding to the Expected Value of fatalities is used within this framework as an indicator of the societal risk.
Socio-economic cost-benefit analysis — A quantified ex-ante evaluation, based on a recognised methodology, of the value of a project, taking into account all the relevant social, economic, health, climate-related and environmental benefits and costs; the analysis of climate-related and environmental costs and benefits is based on the environmental impact assessment carried out pursuant to Directive 2011/92/EU.
Socioeconomic drivers — Entities which by their mission, nature or location can directly or indirectly generate important socioeconomic benefits for citizens, business and local communities located in their surrounding territory, or in their area of influence.
Software tool — Computer programme that performs a set of functions to support the execution of a process. EXAMPLE:Software programme, database, computerized spreadsheet, electronic file or web tool, bought from the market or developed by the organization.
Solar radiation — Parameter without explanation in the document
SOLAS — International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, International Maritime Organization
SOLAS — International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
Sole carrier — A carrier that operates a transport service independently of other carriers
Solid — (a) a substance with a melting point or initial melting point of more than 20 °C at a pressure of 101.3 kPa, or (b) a substance which is not liquid according to the ASTM D 4359-90 test method or which is pasty according to the criteria applicable to the test for determining fluidity (penetrometer test) described in 2.3.4.
Solid biofuels — It covers solid organic, non-fossil material of biological origin (also known as biomass) which may be used as fuel for heat production or electricity generation. In energy statistics, solid biofuels is a product aggregate equal to the sum of charcoal, fuelwood, wood residues and by-products, black liquor, bagasse, animal waste, other vegetal materials and residuals and renewable fraction of industrial waste.
SOLR — Single On-board Location Reference
SoM — Start of Mission
Sound financial management — Implementation of the budget in accordance with the principles of economy, efficiency and effectiveness.
Sound financial management — Principle according to which budget appropriations must be used according to the principles of economy, efficiency and effectiveness.
Sound pressure level Lp — Lp=10lg (p/p0)^2 dB where p is the sound pressure and the reference value in airborne acoustics is p0 = 20 μPa. Note 1 to entry: Because of practical limitations of the measuring instruments, p2 is always understood to denote the square of a frequency-weighted, frequency-band-limited or time weighted sound pressure or both. If specific frequency and time weightings, as specified in IEC 61672‑1:2002, or specific frequency bands or both are applied, this should be indicated by appropriate subscripts.
Sound pressure p — Difference between instantaneous total pressure and static pressure Note 1 to entry: The quantity refers also to the rms value.
SP — Segment Profile
SpA — IT: società per azioni
Spaceport — An installation for testing and launching space crafts.
SPAD — Signal Passed at Danger
Special conditions to switch over between different class B train protection, control and warning systems — Conditions  to  switch  over  between  different  class  B  train protection,  control  and  warning  systems.
Special instructions to switch over between different radio systems — Name and/or reference of the document specifying the Special instructions  to  switch  over  between  different  radio  systems.
Special Instruments — Instruments to allow the Union to react to specified unforeseen circumstances or to allow the financing of clearly identified expenditure which cannot be financed within the limits of the ceilings available for one or more headings. Their mobilisation is subject to a decision of the budgetary authority, acting on a transfer proposal from the “reserve” title to the line concerned
Special purpose road motor vehicle — It is a road motor vehicle designed for purposes other than the carriage of passengers or goods. This category includes: - fire brigade vehicles, - mobile cranes, - self-propelled rollers, - bulldozers with metallic wheels or track, - vehicles for recording film, radio and TV broadcasting, - mobile library vehicles, - towing vehicles for vehicles in need of repair, - other special purpose road motor vehicles.
Special technical conditions required to switch over   between   ERTMS/ETCS   and   Class   B systems — Name and/or reference of the document specifying the Special technical conditions required to switch over between ERTMS/ ETCS  and  Class  B  systems
Special train — A train running just once, or using only a few irregular tailor-made paths during the timetable period, which does not need to be registered in the annual timetable (the train can be the same, but not the path).
Special vehicle — Rail mounted machine with running mode.
Special vehicles — Special vehicles, such as On-Track Machines (OTMs), are categorised in the EVR Decision (EU) 2018/1614. They can be grouped into the following subsets: (i)	On track Machines (OTMs) are vehicles specially designed for construction and maintenance of the track and infrastructure.  (ii)	Infrastructure Inspection Vehicles (IIVs) are vehicles utilised to monitor the condition of the infrastructure. (iii)	Environment vehicles are vehicles designed for clearance of the track from environmental conditions such as snow clearance machines. (iv)	Emergency vehicles are vehicles designed for a specific emergency use such as evacuation, firefighting, and recovery of trains (including the breakdown cranes). (v)	Road-Rail vehicles are self-propelled machines able to move on rails and on the ground.
Specialised infrastructure / line — Where there are suitable alternative routes, the Infrastructure Manager may, after consultation with interested parties, designate particular infrastructure for use by specified types of traffic. When such designation has occurred the IM may give priority to this type of traffic when allocating infrastructure capacity. A specialised line is NOT a line used exclusively by one type of traffic (freight or passengers) but a line where one type of traffic will be preferred and given priority when allocating capacity.
Specific case — Any part of the rail system which needs special provisions in the TSIs, either temporary or permanent, because of geographical, topographical or urban environment constraints or those affecting compatibility with the existing system, in particular railway lines and networks isolated from the rest of the Union, the loading gauge, the track gauge or space between the tracks and vehicles strictly intended for local, regional or historical use, as well as vehicles originating from or destined for third countries (Article 2(13) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Specific case — Any part of the rail system which needs special provisions in the TSIs, either temporary or permanent, because of geographical, topographical or urban environment constraints or those affecting compatibility with the existing system, in particular railway lines and networks isolated from the rest of the Union, the  loading gauge, the track gauge or space between the tracks and vehicles strictly intended for local, regional or historical use, as well as vehicles originating from or destined for third countries.
Specific case — Any  part of the rail system  which needs special provisions in the TSIs, either permanent,  because  of  geographical,  topographical  or  urban  environment constraints   or   those   affecting   compatibility   with   the   existing   system,   in particular railway lines and networks isolated from the rest of the Union, the loading gauge, the track gauge or space between the tracks and vehicles strictly intended for local, regional or historical use, as well as vehicles originating from or destined for third countries (Article 2(13) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Specific case — Any  part  of  the  rail  system  which  needs  special  provisions  in  the  TSIs,  either temporary  or  permanent,  because  of  geographical,  topographical  or  urban environment  constraints  or  those  affecting  compatibility  with  the  existing system,  in  particular  railway  lines  and  networks  isolated  from  the  rest  of  the Union,  the  loading  gauge,  the  track  gauge  or  space  between  the  tracks  and vehicles strictly intended for local, regional or historical use, as well as vehicles originating from or destined for third countries (Article 2(13) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Specific case — Any part of the rail system of the Contracting States which is indicated as a special provision in the UTP, either temporarily or definitively, because of geographical, topographical or urban environment constraints or those affecting compatibility with the existing system. This may include in particular railway lines and networks isolated from the rest of the network, the loading gauge, the track gauge or space between the tracks as well as vehicles strictly intended for local, regional or historical use, and vehicles originating from or destined for third countries.
Specific constraints imposed by the GSM-R network operator on ETCS on-board units only able to operate in circuit-switch — These constraints, where applicable, are meant to manage the limited number of circuit-switched radio connections  that can be  handled  simultaneously  by  a  Radio  Block  Center.
Specific facilities for the transport of freight — E.g. securing of freight, air-supply for other purpose than brake, provisions for the hydraulic/pneumatic equipment of freight wagons, requirements for freight loading and unloading, special requirements to the vehicle for vehicle turn dumping.
Specific information — Any relevant information from the IM re lating to the line layout
Specific items to place on-board — To announce specific items to place on-board which are required for operational reasons in normal and degraded mode (e.g. scotches, if the parking brake performance is not sufficient depending on track gradient, coupling adapters, rescue couplers, etc.). Requirements for distribution and availability of the items may be added here. See also parameter 9.5.3.
Specific operational requirements — Parameter without explanation in the document
Specific requirements for power supply — Specific requirements for power supply, e.g. power factor, sensitivity of on-board protection system.
Specific transmission module — Device allowing the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment to be interfaced with the on-board part of an existing National Train Control system. It allows smooth transitions from/to the National System and gives access to some ERTMS/ETCS on-board resources (e.g. DMI).
Specification of condition of use where ETCS on-board does not implement all functions, interfaces and performances — Analysis of the impact when not implementing all functions, performances and interfaces specified in CCS TSI by the ETCS on-board subsystem. Useful for additional authorisations.
Specified requirement — Need or expectation that is stated NOTE Specified requirements may be stated in normative documents such as regulations, standards and technical specifications. (ISO 17000:2005, § 3.1.)
Specimen — Representative piece of the product that is tested together with any substrate or treatment. Note 1 to entry: The specimen may include an air gap.
Specimen — Representative piece of the product which is to be tested together with any substrate or treatment. Note 1 to entry: For certain types of product, for example products that contain an air gap or joints, it may not be possible to prepare specimens that are representative of the end-use conditions (see Clause 7).
Speed confidence interval — The interval within which the ERTMS/ETCS on-board assumes the actual train speed with a defined probability.
Speed indication — Requirements concerning the speed indication system (accuracy/tolerances etc.). Excluded: recording of speed covered by parameter 9.6 (Recording device).
Spine wagon — A rail wagon with a central chassis designed to carry a semi-trailer.
Splitting from — The operation by which two trains, having run until now coupled to each other but with different train numbers, stop in a station and are divided from each other to continue separately their journeys keeping each its original train number
SPMU — Speed Monitoring Unit
Spor transmission — Transmission between trackside and on-board that takes place at discrete locations.
Spread of flame — Propagation of a flame front over the surface of a product under the influence of imposed irradiance.
Spreader — Adjustable fitting on lifting equipment designed to connect with the upper corner fittings of an ITU. Many spreaders have in addition grappler arms that engage the bottom side rails of an ITU.
SPReq — Segment Profile Request
SPRL — FR: société de personnes à responsabilité limitée
SQL — Structured Query Language.  A language devised by IBM, then standardised by ANSI and ISO, which is used for creating, managing and retrieving data in relational databases
SR — Staff Responsible mode
SR — Suriname
SR — Staff Responsible
SRAC — Safety Related Application Conditions
SRS — System Requirement Specification
SRS — System Requirements Specification
SRT — Safety in Railway Tunnels (TSI)
SRT — Safety in Railway Tunnels
SRT TSI — Safety in Railway Tunnel TSI
SS — Subsystem
SS — South Sudan
SSEM — Supervised Speed Envelope Management STR
SSL — Secure Socket Layer
SSP — Static Speed Profile
SSS — Short sea shipping
ST — Sao Tome and Principe
Stabex — System for the stabilisation of ACP and OCT export earnings
Stacking — Storage or carriage of ITUs on top of each other.
Staff — Employees working for a railway undertaking or an infrastructure manager, or their contractors, undertaking tasks as specified in this Regulation.
Staff access for coupling/uncoupling — E.g. Berne rectangle, handrails under the buffers.
Staff and freight access doors — This parameter addresses doors for freight use and for use of train crew other than cab doors. E.g. doors equipped with security device for opening only by staff including catering, also doors to engine room. Excluded: doors for passenger use, cab doors (also external walkways on hood units).
Staff facilities, interfaces and environment — Parameter without explanation in the document
Staff or employees including the staff of contractors — Any persons whose employment is in connection with a railway and is at work at the moment of the accident; it includes the crew of the train and persons handling rolling stock and infrastructure installations.
Staff Regulations — The Staff Regulations of Officials of the European Union and the Conditions of Employment of Other Servants of the European Union laid down in Regulation (EEC, Euratom, ECSC) No 259/68.
Staff responsible mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that allows a driver to take full responsibility for the movement of a train in an equipped area. The ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment will impose a speed limit in this mode.
Stakeholder — A person, group or organisation that has interest or concern in an organisation.
Stakeholders — Any person or organisation with a reasonable interest in train service delivery e.g.: Railway Undertaking (RU), Shipment monitoring provider, Locomotive provider, Wagon provider, Driver/Train crew provider, Hump yard provider, Switch move provider, Service integrator, Slot provider (IM), Train controller (IM), Traffic manager, Fleet manager Ferry boat provider, Wagon, locomotive inspector, Wagon, locomotive repair provider, Shipment manager, Switching & humping provider, Logistic provider, Consignee, Consignor, For Intermodal in addition: Container Provider, Intermodal terminal operator, Drayage provider/Haulage company, Steam ship, Barge lines.
Stakeholders — Any person or organisation with a reasoned interest in train service delivery e.g.: - Railway undertaking, - Locomotive provider, - Coach provider, - Driver/train crew provider, - Infrastructure manager (IM), - Fleet manager, - Ferry boat operator, - Worker, - Ticket vendor, - Passenger
Standard — A technical specification, adopted by a recognised standardisation body, for repeated or continuous application, with which compliance is not compulsory, and which is one of the following: (a)	‘international standard’ means a standard adopted by an international standardisation body; (b)	‘European standard’ means a standard adopted by a European standardisation organisation; (c)	‘harmonised standard’ means a European standard adopted on the basis of a request made by the Commission for the application of Union harmonisation legislation; (d)	‘national standard’ means a standard adopted by a national standardisation body.
Standard — A standard as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Standard — A standard as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Standard  combined  transport  profile  number for  containers — Coding  for  combined  transport  for  containers  (for  all  freight and  mixed-traffic  lines)  in  accordance  with  the  specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [B]
Standard  combined  transport  profile  number for  roller  units — Coding  for  combined  transport for  roller units  (for all freight and  mixed-traffic  lines)  in  accordance  with  the  specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [B]
Standard combined transport profile number for semi-trailers — Coding for combined transport for semi-trailers (for all freight and  mixed-traffic  lines)  in  accordance  with  the  specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [B]
Standard combined transport profile number for swap bodies — Coding   for  combined  transport  with  swap  bodies  (for  all freight  and  mixed-traffic  lines)  in  accordance  with  the  spec ification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1,  index  [B]
Standard goods classification for transport statistics (NST) — The Standard goods classification for transport statistics abbreviated as NST (2007), is a statistical nomenclature for the goods transported by four modes of transport: road, rail, inland waterways and sea (maritime). As NST 2007 considers the economic activity from which the goods originate, each of its items is strongly connected to an item of the European Union product and activity classifications Classification of products by activity (CPA) and Statistical classification of economic activities (NACE), which themselves are consistent with their counterparts at UN level, CPC and ISIC. The complete classification is available in Eurostat's classifications database - Ramon (Eurostat metadata).
Standards — Astandard as defined in Article 2, point (1), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (30).
Standby mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode that is a default mode when the on-board equipment is powered up or that is entered when shunting or non-leading mode is left or when the active cab is closed.
Standstill, ETCS — A state which is entered when the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment determines that the train is not moving, and which is left when the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment determines that the train is moving. Important note: The criteria for determining standstill are not harmonised. An ERTMS/ETCS on-board reporting “standstill” does not guarantee that there is no train movement at all.
START — Strategic arms reduction talks
Start of fire (LPI) — This critical event corresponds to the specific reaction between an oxidizing substance and a flammable or combustible substance, or to the autonomous decomposition of organic peroxide leading to a fire. This critical event concerns only substances that may cause fire (organic peroxides) or that may cause fire when in contact with combustible materials. This event can also be associated with pyrotechnic substances.
Start of the package — The beginning of the performance of travel services included in the package;
Start of tunnel — Geographical  coordinates  in  decimal  de grees and km of the line at the beginning of a tunnel.
Starting noise impact — Starting noise impact caused by the vehicle upon the environment external to the railway system.
Stated preference — Valuation technique wherein monetary estimates are derived from hypothetical statements by individuals about their preferences, typically relying on a questionnaire approach; an example is the contingent valuation method.
Statement of assurance (DAS) — The European Court of Auditors provides the European Parliament and the Council each year with a statement of assurance (DAS - from “Déclaration d’Assurance”, in French) as to the reliability of the accounts of all revenue and expenditure of the Union and the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions. The statement of assurance shall be published in the  Official Journal of the EU (Article 287 TFUE
Static contact force — Vertical force exerted upwards by the pantograph head on the OCL, and caused by the pantograph-raising device, whilst the pantograph is raised and the vehicle is standstill
Static data — Data that do not change often or on a regular basis.
Static friction coefficient — Coefficient of friction achieved by the friction material at the point where relative movement between the friction material surface and wheel tread starts to take place.
Static speed profile — The description of the fixed speed restrictions of a given line. The speed restrictions can be related to such items as maximum line speed, curves, points, tunnel profiles, bridges.
Station — A railway location where a passenger train can start, stop or end.
Station — A place where trains stop, or where loading and unloading occurs, and where assistance may be available. Where there can be points (facing or trailing) that makes it possible for the train to use different routes.
Station — A location on a railway where a rail passenger service can start, stop or end.
Station — Location comprising buildings and structures used for the boarding/alighting and loading/unloading of trains.
Station / railway station — Terminal, depot, yard or halt. A place where trains stop, or where loading and unloading occurs, and where assistance may be available. Also a place where there can be points (facing or trailing) that make it possible for the train to use different routes. Eurostat/ITF/UNECE definition: a railway establishment which is either open or not to the public, generally staffed and which is designed for one or more of the following operations:  - formation, dispatch, reception and temporary stabling of trains  - stabling and marshalling of rolling stock  - boarding and alighting of passengers  - generally, where open to public, providing facilities for the purchase of tickets   - loading and unloading of goods.
Station Manager — The station manager is an organisational entity in a Member State, which has been made responsible for the management of a railway station and which may be the infrastructure manager.
Station manager — An organisational entity in a Member State, which has been made responsible for the management of a railway station and which may be the infrastructure manager
Station manager — An organisational entity in a Member State, which has been made responsible for the management of one or more railway stations and which may be the infrastructure manager
Station manager — Organisational entity in an EU Member State, which has been made responsible for the management of a railway station
Stationary noise impact — Stationary noise impact caused by the vehicle upon the environment external to the railway system.
Statistical classification of economic activities (NACE) — The Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community, abbreviated as NACE, is the classification of economic activities in the European Union (EU); the term NACE is derived from the French Nomenclature statistique des activités économiques dans la Communauté européenne. Various NACE versions have been developed since 1970. NACE is a four-digit classification providing the framework for collecting and presenting a large range of statistical data according to economic activity in the fields of economic statistics (e.g. production, employment and national accounts) and in other statistical domains developed within the European statistical system (ESS). NACE Rev. 2, a revised classification, was adopted at the end of 2006 and, in 2007, its implementation began. The first reference year for NACE Rev. 2 compatible statistics is 2008, after which NACE Rev. 2 will be consistently applied to all relevant statistical domains. Previous versions of NACE have been: - NACE (1970) - NACE Rev. 1, the first revision of the original NACE (1970); - NACE Rev. 1.1, a minor revision of NACE Rev. 1. - NACE Rev. 2.
Statistical classification of products by activity (CPA) — The Statistical classification of products by activity, abbreviated as CPA, is the classification of products (goods as well as services) at the level of the European Union (EU). Product classifications are designed to categorize products that have common characteristics. They provide the basis for collecting and calculating statistics on the production, distributive trade, consumption, international trade and transport of such products. CPA product categories are related to activities as defined by the Statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community (NACE). Each CPA product - whether a transportable or non-transportable good or a service - is assigned to one single NACE activity. This linkage to NACE activities gives the CPA a structure parallel to that of NACE at all levels. The CPA is part of an integrated system of statistical classifications, developed mainly under the auspices of the United Nations Statistical Division. This system makes it possible to compare statistics across countries and in different statistical domains. CPA has a hierarchical structure with six levels, each identified with a specific code: - first level: 21 sections (alphabetical code); - second level: 88 divisions (two-digit numerical code); - third level: 261 groups (three-digit numerical code); - fourth level: 575 classes (four-digit numerical code); - fifth level: 1 342 categories (five-digit numerical code); - sixth level: 3 142 subcategories (six-digit numerical code).
Statistical confidentiality — The protection of confidential data related to single statistical units which are obtained directly for statistical purposes or indirectly from administrative or other sources and implying the prohibition of use for non-statistical purposes of the data obtained and of their unlawful disclosure.
Statistical port — It consists of one or more ports, normally controlled by a single port authority, able to record ship and cargo movements.
Statistical unit — The basic observation unit, namely a natural person, a household, an economic operator and other undertakings, referred to by the data.
Statistics — Quantitative and qualitative, aggregated and representative information characterising a collective phenomenon in a considered population.
Steady red lights required — Sections  where  two  steady  red  lights  are required  in  accordance  with TSI OPE
Steam boiler installations — Parameter without explanation in the document
Steep incline — Such incline in which the holding brake force is not sufficient to maintain the train stationary.
Steep slope — Such downward slope in which the holding brake force is not sufficient to maintain the train stationary.
Step-free route — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. It is a division of an obstacle-free route that meets the needs of mobility impaired persons. Changes in level are avoided or, when they cannot be avoided, they are bridged via ramps or lifts.
STM — Specific Transmission Module
STM — Specific Transition Module
STM requirements — Requirements related to STM solutions (separate STM or integrated within ETCS on-board).
STOA — Scientific and technological options assessment
Stop aspect — Any signal aspect that does not allow the driver to pass the signal.
Stop signal — Any main signal capable of showing a stop danger aspect or indication. Position, from where no movement authority is given to a train. It is not necessarily a fixed signal.
Stopping point — A location identified in the schedule of a train where the train is planned to stop, usually to carry out a specific activity such as allowing passengers to join and leave the train.
Stopping Point — A Timing Point defined in the Segment Profile where the train is planned to stop within a given time window defined in the Journey Profile, usually to carry out a specific activity such as allowing passengers to enter and leave the train.
Stopping Point Skip — The functionality that enables a train to continue driving without stopping at a Timing Point that had previously been scheduled as a Stopping Point.
Storage facilities for use by staff — Parameter without explanation in the document
Storage of fluid in small packages — Low capacity storage of fluids in carboys or drums and all storage tanks with individual volume smaller than 1 m³.
Storage of solids in small packages — Low capacity storage of solids in bags and in storage tanks with individual volume smaller than 1 m³.
Storage siding — Sidings specifically dedicated to temporary parking of railway vehicles between two assignments.
Storage sidings / siding(s) — General definition: sidings are tracks branching off running tracks that are not part of any running line, on which vehicles are marshalled, stabled (to store locomotives and rolling stock), loaded, unloaded or serviced clear of a running line. The length of sidings is included in the length of tracks if the sidings are managed by the infrastructure manager, private sidings being excluded. EU Decision of 15 September 2011 on the common specifications of the register of railway infrastructure: ‘siding’ means any track which is not used for train service movements. DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU (Recast): 'sidings specifically dedicated to temporary parking of railway vehicles between two assignments'.
Storage unit — Unit used for the storage of raw materials, intermediate goods, manufactured products, or waste products.
STR — Status Report
Straddle carrier — A rubber-tyred overhead lifting vehicle for moving or stacking containers on a level reinforced surface.
Strategic noise map — A map designed for the global assessment of noise exposure in a given area due to different noise sources or for overall predictions for such an area.
Strength and integrity — Requirements for the mechanical strength of car body, under-frame, suspension systems, track sweeper and snow plough. Mechanical strength of separate items of this list such as bogie/running gear, axle box, suspension, axle shaft, wheel, axle bearings and pantograph will be defined separately.
Structural equipment — (a) for tanks of a tank-wagon, means the external or internal reinforcing, fastening or protective members of the shell; (b) for tanks of a tank-container, means the external or internal reinforcing, fastening, protective or stabilizing members of the shell; NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7. (c) for elements of a battery-wagon or an MEGC means the external or internal reinforcing, fastening, protective or stabilizing members of the shell or receptacle; (d) for IBCs other than flexible IBCs means the reinforcing, fastening, handling, protective or stabilizing members of the body (including the base pallet for composite IBCs with plastics inner receptacle).
Structure and mechanical parts — Parameter without explanation in the document
Structure and responsibility — A structured approach to define the responsibilities of individuals and teams for secure delivery of the organisation's safety objectives.
Structure gauge — Defines the space in relation to the reference track that shall be cleared of all objects or structures and of the traffic on the adjacent tracks, in order to allow safe operation on the reference track. It is defined on the basis of the reference contour by application of the associated rules.
STSD — Stations and sidings
Studies — Activities needed to prepare project implementation, such as preparatory, mapping, feasibility, evaluation, testing and validation studies, including in the form of software, and any other technical support measure, including prior action to define and develop a project and decide on its financing, such as reconnaissance of the sites concerned and preparation of the financial package.
Stuffing/Stripping — Loading and unloading of cargo into or from an ITU.
Sub-System — A combination of equipment, units, assemblies, etc., which performs an operational function and is a major subdivision of the system.
Subcontractor — An economic operator that is proposed by a candidate or tenderer or contractor to perform part of a contract or by a beneficiary to perform part of the tasks co-financed by a grant.
Subscription — Sums paid to bodies of which the Union is member, in accordance with the budgetary decisions and the conditions of payment established by the body concerned.
Substation — A substation is a part of a station. For example, part of a station can be dedicated to high speed traffic, another to regional traffic and another to urban traffic
Substations — Connected on the primary side to the high-voltage grid, with transformation of the high-voltage to a voltage and/or conversion to a power supply system suitable for the trains. On the secondary side, substations are connected to the railway contact line system
Substitute carrier — A railway undertaking, which has not concluded a transport contract with the passenger, but to whom the railway undertaking that is party to the contract has entrusted, in whole or in part, the performance of the transport by rail.
Substitute carrier — Carrier who has not concluded the contract of carriage with the consignor  but to whom the carrier has entrusted the performance of the carriage by  rail in total or in part.
Substitute carrier — A carrier, who has not concluded the contract of carriage with the passenger, but to whom the carrier referred to in letter (a) has entrusted, in whole or in part, the performance of the carriage by rail.
Substitution in the framework of maintenance — Any replacement of components by parts of identical function and performance in the framework of preventive or corrective maintenance (Article 2(17) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Substitution in the framework of maintenance — Any replacement of components by parts of identical function and performance in the framework of maintenance, as defined in Article 2(17) of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Substitution in the framework of maintenance — Any  replacement  of  components  by  parts  of  identical function and performance in the framework of preventive or corrective maintenance.
Substitution in the framework of maintenance — Any replacement of components by parts of identical function and performance in  the  framework  of  preventive  or  corrective  maintenance  (Article  2(17)  of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Substitution in the framework of maintenance — Any replacement of components by parts of identical function and performance in the framework of preventive or corrective maintenance.
Substrate — Material that is used, or is representative of that used, immediately beneath a surface product. EXAMPLE:Skimmed plasterboard beneath a wall-covering.
Subsystem placed in service without an EC declaration of verification — A subsystem, fixed or mobile, that has been placed in service before ‘EC’ verification procedure was applicable to it in accordance with Council Directive 96/48/EC , Directive 2001/16/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council or Directive 2008/57/EC, and thus without an ‘EC’ declaration of verification.
Subsystems — The result of the division of the rail system, as shown in Annex II to Directive 2008/57/EC.
Subsystems — The structural or functional parts of the Union rail system, as set out in Annex II of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Subsystems — The result of the division of the rail system, as shown in the UTP; these subsystems, for which essential requirements must be laid down, may be structural or functional.
Successive carrier — Carrier in a chain of carriers who perform the contract of carriage with the passenger and who are liable for the performance of that contract. Successive carriers are shown in code on tickets.
Suicide — An act to deliberately injure oneself resulting in death, as recorded and classified by the competent national authority.
Suicide — Act to deliberately injure oneself resulting in death, as recorded and classified by the competent national authority.
Super high cube container — Container exceeding ISO dimensions. These dimensions vary and may include, for example, lengths of 45’ (13.72 m), 48’ (14.64 m), or 53’ (16.10 m).
Supervised manoeuvre — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment operating mode which allows a shunting consist to be supervised with a Movement Authority, while the engine and its active cab can be located anywhere in the consist.
Supervisory authority — An independent public authority which is established by a Member State pursuant to Article 51.
Supervisory authority concerned — A supervisory authority which is concerned by the processing of personal data because: (a)  the controller or processor is established on the territory of the Member State of that supervisory authority; (b)  data subjects residing in the Member State of that supervisory authority are substantially affected or likely to be substantially affected by the processing; or (c)  a complaint has been lodged with that supervisory authority.
Supervisory board — The most senior body of an undertaking that fulfils supervisory tasks, including the exercise of control over the management board and general strategic decisions regarding the undertaking.
Supplementary sign — Sign that is supportive of a safety sign and the main purpose of which is to provide additional clarification.
Supply chain — System of organizations, people, activities, information and resources involved in transforming materials and knowledge in a product or a service for the customer
Supply contract — A contract covering the purchase, leasing, rental or hire purchase, with or without option to buy, of products, and which may include, as an incidental matter, siting and installation operations.
Supported system version — A system version supported by the on-board equipment is one of the system versions the on-board equipment is able to operate. By definition, within one of its supported system version numbers X, the on-board equipment always operates one single system version number Y, which is the highest defined in the release of the ETCS specifications the on-board equipment is compliant with. Important note: if within a system version number X at least two values of Y have been defined, the fact that the on-board always operates/supports the highest value Y does not mean that it is not able to handle trackside information using a lower value of Y.
Surplus — Positive difference between revenue and expenditure (see outturn) which has to be returned to the Member States.
Surveillance — Systematic iteration of conformity assessment activities as a basis for maintaining the validity of the statement of conformity (ISO 17000:2005, § 6.1)
Suspension of authorisation — Decision taken by an authorising entity according to which an authorisation for a vehicle type is temporarily suspended and no vehicle may be authorised to be placed on the market on the basis of its conformity to the given type, until the causes that motivated the suspension have been analysed. Suspension of authorisation for a vehicle type does not apply to the vehicles already in use.
Sustainable urban mobility plan or SUMP — A document for strategic mobility planning, aiming at improving, in a sustainable way, accessibility to and mobility within the functional urban area, including commuting zones in that urban area or in its vicinity), for people, businesses and goods in view in particular of a better quality of life.
Sustained flaming — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of more than 4 s.
Sustained flaming — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of over 10 s.
SV — El Salvador
sv — Swedish
SvL — Supervised Location
Swap body — Intermodal Loading Unit optimised to road vehicle dimensions and fitted with handling devices for transfer between modes, usually road/rail. It is handled by gantry cranes or mobile transhipment equipment by the grappler pockets using grabs and lifted and loaded on the carrier wagons (vertical transhipment). In this document, the swap bodies considered are codified and suitable for wagons with a compatibility code C.
Swap body — See "Container"
Swap body — A freight-carrying unit optimised to road vehicle dimensions and fitted with handling devices for transfer between modes, usually road/rail. Such units were not originally designed to be stacked when full or top-lifted. Many units now can be, although not to the same extent as containers. The main feature distinguishing them from containers is that they are optimised to road vehicle dimensions. Such a unit would need UIC approval to be used on rail. Some swap bodies are equipped with folding legs on which the unit stands when not on the vehicle.
Swap body — A freight carrying unit optimised to road vehicle dimensions and fitted with handling devices for transfer between modes, usually road/rail. Originally, such units were not capable of being stacked when full or top-lifted. But many units can now be stacked and top-lifted and the main feature distinguishing them from containers is that they are optimised to vehicle dimensions. Such units would need a UIC approval to be used on rail. Some swap bodies are equipped with folding legs on which the unit stands when not on the vehicle.
SWIFT — Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Transfers
Swing nose — Within the domain of ‘common crossing with movable point’, the term ‘swing nose’ identifies the part of the crossing which forms the vee and that it is moved to form a continuous running edge for either the main or the branch line.
Swiss home trade — Any carriage of goods for hire or reward from one Member State of the Community to another Member State by a vehicle registered in Switzerland, whether or not, in the course of the same journey and using the normal route, the vehicle travels through Switzerland.
Switch — A unit of track comprising two fixed rails (stock rails) and two movable rails (switch rails) used to direct vehicles from one track to another track.
Switches and crossings — Track constructed from sets of switches and individual crossings and the rails connecting them.
SWOT — Strengths weaknesses opportunities threats
SX — Sint Maarten (Dutch part)
SY — Syrian Arab Republic (the)
Sysmin — Special financing facility for ACP and OCT mining products
System — Any part of the railway system which is subjected to a change whereby the change may be of a technical, operational or organisational nature.
System — A composite of equipment, skills, and techniques capable of performing or supporting an operational role, or both. A complete system includes all equipment, related facilities, material, software, services and personnel required for its operation and support to the degree that it can be considered a self-sufficient unit in its intended operational environment.
System failure mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode entered when a fatal failure which could affect safety is found.
System identifier — A numbering scheme to identify the system version and distinguish between a functional and a realization identifier.
System life-cycle — The system lifecycle and associated terms are defined in reference 3.
System owner — It is the individual responsible for the overall procurement, development, integration, modification, operation, maintenance, and retirement of a CIS.
System separation — Indication  of  existence  of  system  separation
System version — The system version defines the ERTMS/ETCS mandatory functions that ensure technical interoperability between ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment and trackside.
Systematic failure — A failure that occurs repeatedly under some particular combination of inputs or under some particular environmental or application conditions.
Systematic fault — An inherent fault in the specification, design, manufacturing, installation, operation or maintenance of the system under assessment.
Systematic fault — An inherent fault in the specification, design, construction, installation, operation or maintenance of a system, sub-system or equipment affecting multiple pieces of equipment under identical circumstances.
Systemic factor — Any causal or contributing factor of an organisational, managerial, societal or regulatory nature that is likely to affect similar and related occurrences in the future, including, in particular the regulatory framework conditions, the design and application of the safety management system, skills of the staff, procedures and maintenance.
Systems requiring special monitoring and protection measures — Parameter without explanation in the document
Systran — Computer translation system
SZ — Eswatini
t — Tonne (metric)
T — Ton
TAC — Total allowable catch
Tacis — Technical assistance to the Commonwealth of Independent States
Tactile Signs andTactile Controls — Definition related to rolling stock: refer to the LOC&PAS TSI point 2.2. They are signs or controls, which include raised pictograms, raised characters or Braille lettering.
TAF — Telematic Applications for Freight Services (TSI)
TAF — Telematic Applications for Freight
TAF — Telematics Applications for Freight
TAF (TSI) — Telematics Applications for Freight (TSI)
Tailor-made contracts — DIRECTIVE 2012/34/EU lists two types of tailor-made contracts: 'Additional services may comprise: [...] (c) tailor-made contracts for: - control of transport of dangerous goods, - assistance in running abnormal trains.' These contracts are made for one specific customer, thus they take into account the customer's particular situation and requirements. The conclusion of the contracts and their contents have to be non-discriminatory.
Tailor-made train path — A train path created specifically to meet a customers' specific needs.
Tailored value — Value allocated by the user to a given parameter of the risk estimation model with the objective of describing the risk situation under consideration in the best way. Only ‘open parameters’ can be tailored. Under this definition tailoring a value can be: ▶   setting a value to an open parameter for which no ‘default’ value is proposed by the model, or, ▶   correcting the ‘default’ value proposed by the model for an open parameter.
TAM — Trade assessment mechanism
Tandem — Two or more traction units mechanically and pneumatically but not electrically coupled in the same train, each one requiring its own driver.
Tandem — Two or more traction units mechanically but not electrically coupled together, used in the same train. Each traction unit requires a separate driver. Only one unit is designated as leading, the other units are therefore classed as non-leading.
Tandem — Two or more traction units mechanically and pneumatically coupled but not  all  remote  controlled  and  where  each  traction  unit  not  remote controlled requires a driver.
Tank — A shell, including its service and structural equipment. When used alone, the term tank means a tank-container, portable tank, tank-wagon, and demountable tank as defined in this Section, including tanks forming elements of battery-wagons or MEGCs.
Tank fire — The tank fire is generally the consequence of the ignition of the gaseous phase in a vessel containing a flammable liquid.
Tank record — A file containing all the important technical information concerning a tank, a batterywagon or a MEGC, such as certificates referred to in 6.8.2.3, 6.8.2.4 and 6.8.3.4.
Tank swap body — It is considered to be a tank-container.
Tank wagon — Wagon designed for the bulk transport of liquids or gases. Sometimes also referred to as tank car.
Tank-container — An article of transport equipment meeting the definition of a container, and comprising a shell and items of equipment, including the equipment to facilitate movement of the tank-container without significant change of attitude, used for the carriage of gases, liquid, powdery or granular substances and, when used for the carriage of gases as defined in 2.2.2.1.1, having a capacity of more than 0.45 m3 (450 litres);. NOTE: IBCs which meet the requirements of Chapter 6.5 are not considered to be tank-containers.
Tank-container or portable tank operator — Any enterprise in whose name the tank-container or portable tank is operated.
Tank-wagon — A wagon intended for the carriage of liquids, gases, powdery or granular substances, comprising a superstructure, consisting of one or more tanks and an underframe fitted with its own items of equipment (running gear, suspension, buffing, traction, braking gear and inscriptions). NOTE: Tank-wagon also includes wagons with demountable tanks.
Tank-wagon operator — Any enterprise in whose name the tank-wagon is registered or approved for transport;        The term "operator" is equivalent to the term "keeper" as defined in Article 2, n) of Appendix G to COTIF (ATMF) and in Article 3s of the Rail Safety Directive (Directive 2004/49/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on safety on the Community's railways and amending Council Directive 95/18/EC on the licensing of railway undertakings, and Directive 2001/14/EC on the allocation of railway infrastructure capacity and the levying of charges for the use of railway infrastructure and safety certification) and in Article 2s of Directive 2008/57/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 June 2008 on the interoperability of the rail system within the Community.
Tanks and pipe systems for flammable liquids — Special requirements for tanks and pipe systems for flammable liquids (including fuel).
TAP — Telematic Applications for Passenger Services (TSI)
TAP — Telematics Applications for Passengers
TAP — Telematic Applications for Passenger services
TAP (TSI) — Telematics Applications for Passengers (TSI)
TAP TSI — Telematic Applications for Passenger services - Technical Specifications of Interoperability
TAP TSI  definition of the subsystem — This TSI covers: (a) the functional subsystem ‘Telematics applications for passenger services’; (b) the part of the maintenance subsystem relating to the telematics applications for passenger services (i.e. methods of use, management, updating and maintenance of databases, software and data communication protocols, etc.). It includes the provision of information on the following aspects: (a) systems providing passengers with information before and during the journey; (b) reservation and payment systems; (c) luggage management; (d) issuing of tickets via ticket offices or ticket selling machines or telephone or Internet, or any other widely available information technology, and on board trains; (e) management of connections between trains and with other modes of transport.
Tare — Weight of ITU or vehicle without cargo.
Tare weight — It is the weight of a transport unit before any cargo is loaded.
Tare weight — The weight of a transport unit (e.g. containers, swap bodies and pallets for containing goods as well as road goods vehicles carrying goods and transported by rail) before any cargo is loaded.
Tare weight of container — The tare weight of a container is included in the total weight of the containerised goods transported, also called the gross-gross weight of goods. The gross weight of containerised goods transported can be calculated from the gross-gross weight by deducting the tare weight of the container and vice versa. If information about the tare weight is missing then the tare weight may be estimated using the averages below. The tare weight of a container may be estimated as: a)	20 Foot ISO container 2.3 tonnes; b)	40 Foot ISO container 3.7 tonnes; c)	ISO container over 20 feet and under 40 feet of length 3.0 tonnes; d)	ISO container over 40 feet of length 4.7 tonnes
Target — Location where the train speed should be below the given target speed
TARIC — Integrated tariff of the European Union
Tariff — A specific set of fares available on a given train, on a given day for a given O-D leg of the journey. Tariffs may be grouped in different categories (such as public fares, Group fares, etc.)
Tariff — A specific set of fares available on a given train, on a given day for a given O-D leg of the journey. Tariffs may be grouped in different categories (such as public fares, Group fares, etc.) (from the TAP glossary)
Tariff border point — A conventional location used to indicate where the responsibility of the passenger is passed from one RU to the next one in case of successive carriers
Tariff zone — A group of more than one station collectively considered as possible origin or destination in a ticket
Tax — A government-imposed levy whose size may or may not be related to the pre-tax price of a good/service.
TBL — Traction/Brake Lever
TC — Temporary Constraint
TC — Technical Committee
TC — Turks and Caicos Islands (the)
TCDC — Technical cooperation among developing countries
TCDD — Türkiye Cumhuriyeti Devlet Demiryolları – Turkish State Railways
TCO — Ticket Controlling Organisation. This is an organisation empowered to inspect passenger tickets. Mostly a carrier. If necessary, the TCO is to deliver security certificates for the International Rail Ticket for Home Printing (IRTHP) to the distributors
TCO — Traction Cut Off
TCO — Ticket Controlling Organisation
TCO — Ticket Controlling Organisation - Organisation charged with verifying passenger tickets and, if appropriate, making the security certificate for the sale of tickets via the internet (IRTHP) and the security certificate for e-tickets available to the distributors. The TCO may be in the same time a sales point, attributor, carrier, distributor and/or issuing undertaking
TCP — Transmission Control Protocol
TCP/IP — Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol
TCR Corridor Coordinator — Entity in charge of the overall coordination of TCRs along the whole RFC as well as of checking their impact on capacity availability
TCV — Tarif Commun Voyageurs
TCV (Tarif Commun Voyageurs) — A commercial agreement by various carriers to allow use of NRT tickets on the trains they operate
TD — Chad
TD — Technical Document
TDG — Transport of dangerous goods
TDO — Train Door Operation
Technical admission — The procedure carried out by the competent authority to authorise a vehicle to operate in international traffic or to authorise a type of construction.
Technical Admission — Procedure by the competent national authority to approve a railway vehicle for running.
Technical assistance — Without prejudice to sector-specific rules, support and capacity-building activities necessary for the implementation of a programme or an action, in particular preparatory, management, monitoring, evaluation, audit and control activities.
Technical compatibility — An ability of two or more structural subsystems or parts of them which have at least one common interface, to interact with each other while maintaining their individual design operating state and their expected level of performance.
Technical Document — Any technical document published by the European Railway Agency pursuant to Article 5(8) of Directive 2008/57
Technical enabler — A person or company providing technical services to any of the actors to facilitate the exchange of messages and data among them, but not participating in the commercial agreements related to the sales of tickets
Technical File — The documentation relating to the vehicle containing all its technical characteristics, including a user manual and the characteristics necessary to identify the object(s) concerned, as described in the relevant UTP.
Technical file accompanying the EC declaration of verification — The combination of all files and documentation gathered by the applicant as required by all applicable EU legislation for a subsystem.
Technical inspection of rolling stock — Trains may be inspected for safety reasons.
Technical name — A recognized chemical name, if relevant a biological name, or other name currently used in scientific and technical handbooks, journals and texts (see 3.1.2.8.1.1).
Technical Number — The technical number is attributed to an ILU. It is a combination of the wagon compatibility code (WCC) and the Combined Transport Profile number (CTP no.) (e.g. C45, P400).
Technical prescription — A rule, other than a technical standard, included in the UTP, relating to the construction, operation, maintenance or safety aspects, or relating to a procedure concerning railway material.
Technical regulation — Technical specifications and other requirements or rules on services, including the relevant administrative provisions, the observance of which is compulsory, de jure or de facto, in the case of marketing, provision of a service, establishment of a service operator or use in a Member State or a major part thereof, as well as laws, regulations or administrative provisions of Member States, except those provided for in Article 7, prohibiting the manufacture, importation, marketing or use of a product or prohibiting the provision or use of a service, or establishment as a service provider. De facto technical regulations shall include: (i) laws, regulations or administrative provisions of a Member State which refer either to technical specifications or to other requirements or to rules on services, or to professional codes or codes of practice which in turn refer to technical specifications or to other requirements or to rules on services, compliance with which confers a presumption of conformity with the obligations imposed by the aforementioned laws, regulations or administrative provisions; (ii) voluntary agreements to which a public authority is a contracting party and which provide, in the general interest, for compliance with technical specifications or other requirements or rules on services, excluding public procurement tender specifications; (iii) technical specifications or other requirements or rules on services which are linked to fiscal or financial measures affecting the consumption of products or services by encouraging compliance with such technical specifications or other requirements or rules on services; technical specifications or other requirements or rules on services linked to national social security systems are not included. This comprises technical regulations imposed by the authorities designated by the Member States and appearing on a list drawn up and updated, where appropriate, by the Commission, in the framework of the Committee referred to in Article 2. The same procedure shall be used for amending this list.
Technical requirement — Requirement that defines the features of the product or service. Note 1 to entry: A technical requirement can be functional or non-functional. Note 2 to entry: See Annex B.
Technical rooms — Technical rooms are enclosed spaces with doors for access/egress inside or outside the tunnel with safety installations which are necessary for at least one of the following functions: self-rescue, evacuation, emergency communication, rescue and fire fighting, signalling and communication equipment, and traction power supply.
Technical specification — Technical specification’ shall mean a document that prescribes technical requirements to be fulfilled by a product, process or service.
Technical specification — A specification contained in a document which lays down the characteristics required of a product such as levels of quality, performance, safety or dimensions, including the requirements applicable to the product as regards the name under which the product is sold, terminology, symbols, testing and test methods, packaging, marking or labelling and conformity assessment procedures. The term ‘technical specification’ also covers production methods and processes used in respect of agricultural products, as referred to in the second subparagraph of Article 38(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), products intended for human and animal consumption, and medicinal products as defined in Article 1 of Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (5), as well as production methods and processes relating to other products, where these have an effect on their characteristics.
Technical specification — A  document  that  prescribes  technical  requirements  to  be  fulfilled  by  a  product, subsystem, process or service.
Technical specification — A document that prescribes technical requirements to be fulfilled by radio equipment.
Technical specification — A document that prescribes technical requirements to be fulfilled by a product, process or service.
Technical specification — A document that prescribes technical requirements to be fulfilled by a product, process, service or system and which lays down one or more of the following: (a)	the characteristics required of a product including levels of quality, performance, interoperability, environmental protection, health, safety or dimensions, and including the requirements applicable to the product as regards the name under which the product is sold, terminology, symbols, testing and test methods, packaging, marking or labelling and conformity assessment procedures; (b)	production methods and processes used in respect of agricultural products as defined in Article 38(1) TFEU, products intended for human and animal consumption, and medicinal products, as well as production methods and processes relating to other products, where these have an effect on their characteristics; (c)	the characteristics required of a service including levels of quality, performance, interoperability, environmental protection, health or safety, and including the requirements applicable to the provider as regards the information to be made available to the recipient, as specified in Article 22(1) to (3) of Directive 2006/123/EC; (d)	the methods and the criteria for assessing the performance of construction products, as defined in point 1 of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 305/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 9 March 2011 laying down harmonised conditions for the marketing of construction products (37), in relation to their essential characteristics.
Technical specification — A technical specification as defined in Article 2, point (4), of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — A specification adopted in accordance with Directive 2008/57/EC by which each subsystem or part subsystem is covered in order to meet the essential requirements and ensure the interoperability of the rail system.
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — Specification that covers a subsystem, or part thereof, as defined in Article 2(11) of Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — A specification adopted in accordance with Directive 2008/57/EC by which each subsystem or part subsystem is covered in order to meet the Essential Requirements and ensure the interoperability of the rail system
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — A specification adopted in accordance with this Directive by which each subsystem or part of a subsystem is covered in order to meet the essential requirements and ensure the interoperability of the Union rail system.
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — A  specification  adopted  in  accordance  with  Directive  (EU) 2016/797 by which each subsystem or part of a subsystem is covered in order to meet the essential requirements and ensure the interoperability of the Union rail system.
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — The specifications by which each subsystem or part of a sub- system is covered in order to meet the essential requirements and to ensure the interoperability of the trans-European high- speed and conventional rail systems as defined in Directives 96/48/EC and 2001/16/EC.
Technical specification for interoperability (TSI) — Specifications drafted by the Agency and adopted by the EC, to ensure the interoperability of the trans-European rail system.
Technical standard — A voluntary standard adopted by a recognised international standardisation body, according to the procedures applicable to it.
Technical Steering Group (TSG) — EIM body, consisting of senior technical managers involved in the Agency’s TSI process work or other areas. The TSG’s task is to monitor and review the work of EIM’s Working Groups and to decide EIM’s positions on specific technical issues.
Technical stop — Stop for crew change or technical reasons, but without offloading/reloading/onboarding.
Technical system — A product or an assembly of products including the design, implementation and support documentation; the development of a technical system starts with its requirements specification and ends with its acceptance; although the design of relevant interfaces with human behaviour is considered, human operators and their actions are not included in a technical system; the maintenance process is described in the maintenance manuals but is not itself part of the technical system.
Technical systems in potentially explosive atmospheres — Special requirements for technical systems in potentially explosive atmospheres (e.g. liquid gas, natural gas and battery-powered systems, including protection of transformer tank).
Technological externality — External effect that is not actively or voluntarily processed through markets, resulting in economic inefficiency; occurs when some firm or individual uses an asset without paying for it (or, more technically, when one productive activity changes the amount of output or welfare which can be produced by some other activity using a given amount of resources). Negative technological externalities reduce the amount of output or welfare an economy can produce with a given allocation of inputs.
TEL — Tetraethyllead
Telegram — A balise telegram contains one header and an identified and coherent set of packets. A balise group message maybe comprised of one or several telegrams.
Telematics applications — In accordance with Annex I of Directive (EU) 2016/797, this subsystem comprises two elements: (a)     applications for passenger services, including systems which provide passengers with information before and during the journey, reservation and payment systems, luggage management and management of connections between trains and with other modes of transport; (b)    applications for freight services, including information systems (real-time monitoring of freight and trains), marshalling and allocation systems, reservation, payment and invoicing systems, management of connections with other modes of transport and production of electronic accompanying documents.
Telematics Applications for Freight Services (TAF TSI) — The technical specification for interoperability relating to the telematics applications for the freight subsystem of the rail system in the European Union.
Telematics Applications for Passenger Services (TAP TSI) — The technical specification for interoperability relating to the subsystem ‘telematics applications for passenger services’ of the trans-European rail system.
Temperature — Refers to the temperature range to be considered for vehicles.
Temperature range — Temperature range for  unrestricted access to  the  line  according  to  European  stand ard.
Template (description) — Pre-defined forms dedicated to assisting the user of the framework in setting the values of risk estimation parameters in a harmonised manner.
Temporary Capacity Rescriction (TCR) — Planned Temporary Capacity Restriction. This term covers the earlier used ‘works’, ‘possessions’, ‘works and possessions’ and ‘capacity restrictions’. It indicates that the restrictions are planned (no force majeure restrictions) and temporary (no long-lasting bottlenecks).
Temporary speed restriction — Reduction of the line speed for a limited period of time.
Temporary speed restriction — A planned speed restriction imposed for temporary conditions such as track maintenance.
Tempus — Trans-European mobility scheme for university studies
TEN — Trans-European Network
TEN — Trans-European Transport Network
TEN — Trans European Network
TEN Classification of platform — Indicates the part of the trans-European network the platform belongs to.
TEN Classification of siding — Indicates the part of the  trans-European network the siding belongs to.
TEN classification of track — Indication of the part of the  trans-European network the track belongs to.
TEN geographic information sysatem identity (GIS ID) — Indication of the GIS ID of the section of TEN-T database to which the track be longs
TEN-T — Trans-European Transport Network TMS
TEN-T — Trans-European Transport Networks
TEN-T comprehensive network — A comprehensive network within the meaning of Article 9 of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
TEN-T core inland waterway port or TEN-T comprehensive inland waterway port — An inland waterway port of the TEN-T core network or TEN-T comprehensive network, as listed and categorised in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
TEN-T core maritime port or TEN-T comprehensive maritime port — A maritime port of the TEN-T core network or TEN-T comprehensive network, as listed and categorised in Annex II to Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
TEN-T core network — A core network within the meaning of Article 38 of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
Tenderer — An economic operator that has submitted a tender.
TENs — Trans-European networks (TENs)
TENs — Trans-European networks
Term — Explanation
Terminal — The installation provided along the freight corridor which has been specially arranged to allow either the loading or the unloading of goods onto or from freight trains, and the integration of rail freight services with road, maritime, river and air services, and either the forming or modification of the composition of freight trains; and, where necessary, performing border procedures at borders with European third countries.
Terminal — General definition: a terminal is any passenger station, freight or parcels depot. CAUTION: 'terminal' here means the place where passenger journeys or freight transits may start or end, rather than the end of the railway itself. Definition in REGULATION (EU) No 913/2010, Art. 2 2(c) : 'the installation provided along the freight corridor which has been specially arranged to allow either the loading and/or the unloading of goods onto/from freight trains, and the integration of rail freight services with road, maritime, river and air services, and either the forming or modification of the composition of freight trains; and, where necessary, performing border procedures at borders with European third countries.'
Terminal — A place equipped for the transshipment and storage of ITUs.
Terminal Advisory Group (TAG) — EC REGULATION 913/2010: 'The management board shall set up an advisory group made up of managers and owners of the terminals of the freight corridor including, where necessary, sea and inland waterway ports. This advisory group may issue an opinion on any proposal by the management board which has direct consequences for investment and the management of terminals. It may also issue own-initiative opinions. The management board shall take any of these opinions into account.'
Terminal equipment — Terminal equipment as defined in point (1) of Article 1 of Commission Directive 2008/63/EC
Terminal Operator — An organisational entity, which has been made responsible for the management of a marshalling yard, multimodal or intermodal terminal, port terminal
Tertiary critical event (TCE) - right side — An event following the secondary critical event (for example, the ignition of a pool after the formation of a pool).
Test pressure — The required pressure applied during a pressure test for initial or periodic inspection (see also "Calculation pressure", "Discharge pressure", "Filling pressure" and "Maximum working pressure (gauge pressure)"). NOTE: For portable tanks, see Chapter 6.7.
Test section — Specific section of track that is associated with a particular set of measurements.
Test section — Specific section of track associated with a particular set of measurements.
TETA — See Train Estimated Time of Arrival
TETA — See train Estimated time of arrival
TEU — Twenty-foot equivalent unit
TEU — Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit
TEU — Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit. A standard unit based on an ISO container of 20 feet length (6.10 m), used as a statistical measure of traffic flows or capacities. One standard 40’ ISO Series 1 container equals 2 TEUs.
Teu (twenty-foot equivalent unit) — A statistical unit based on a 20 foot long (6.10 m) ISO container to provide a standardised measure of containers of various capacities and for describing the capacity of container ships or terminals. •	One 20 foot ISO container equals 1 TEU. •	One 40 foot ISO container equals 2 TEU. •	One container with a length between 20 and 40 feet equals 1.50 TEU. •	One container with a length of more than 40 feet equals 2.25 TEU.
TEU (Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit) — A standard unit based on an ISO container of 20 feet length (6,10 m), used as a statistical measure of traffic flows or capacities. One standard 40' ISO Series 1 container equals 2 TEUs. Swap bodies under 20 feet correspond to 0,75 TEU, between 20 feet and 40 feet to 1,5 TEU and over 40 feet to 2,25 TEU.
Teu-kilometre — Unit of measurement representing the movement of one TEU over one kilometre.
Text message — Information in writing displayed on the Driver Machine Interface.
Text message — Information in writing displayed on the DMI.
TF — French Southern Territories (the)
TG — Togo
TGV — High-speed train (FR: train à grande vitesse)
TH — Thailand
The Agency — European Union Agency for Railways
The maintenance design justification file — The maintenance design justification file explains how maintenance activities are defined and designed in order to ensure that the rolling stock characteristics will be kept within permissible limits of use during its lifetime.
The mean contact force Fm — Is the statistical mean value of the pantograph contact force and is formed by the static and aerodynamic components of the contact force with dynamic correction.
The occupation of road haulage operator — The activity of any undertaking transporting goods for hire or reward by means of either a motor vehicle or a combination of vehicles.
The occupation of road passenger transport operator — The activity of any undertaking engaged, for hire or reward, in the international carriage of passengers by coach or bus.
The public — One or more natural or legal persons and, in accordance with national legislation or practice, their associations, organisations or groups.
Third country — A country that is not a Member State of the Union.
Third party — Any public or private undertaking, which is not a railway undertaking or infrastructure manager and provides services ancillary to, or in connection with, the services/transport services.
Third party — Any natural or legal person, or any entity outside the institution concerned, including the Member States, other Community or non-Community institutions and bodies and third countries.
Third party — A natural or legal person, public authority, agency or body other than the data subject, controller, processor and persons who, under the direct authority of the controller or processor, are authorised to process personal data.
Third Party — Any person other than the manager, the carrier and their auxiliaries
Three-rail system — Particular case of a multi-rail track, in which one rail is common for two track gauges.
Through or into — For the carriage of radioactive material, means through or into the countries in which a consignment is carried but specifically excludes countries "over" which a consignment is carried by air provided that there are no scheduled stops in those countries.
Through route — Route through the train which can be entered and exited from different ends and which permits the movement of passengers and staff, along the longitudinal axis of the train without obstruction. Interior doors on the through route which are intended to be used by passengers in normal service and which can also be opened in case of power failure are considered not to obstruct the movement of passengers and staff.
Through route — In the context of switches and crossings a route which perpetuate the general alignment of the track.
Through ticket — A ticket or tickets representing a transport contract for successive railway services operated by one or more railway undertakings.
Through-ticket — A through-ticket as defined in point (35) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU
TI — Train Interface
Ticket — A material or immaterial registration entitling a passenger to contractually use one or more commercial transport services offered by one or more railway undertakings
Ticket — Valid evidence, regardless of its form, of the conclusion of a transport contract.
Ticket On departure — A fulfilment method where the customer makes its purchase in advance (e.g. at home) and collects the ticket in the departure Station, at a ticket counter or vending machine
Ticket vendor — Any retailer of rail transport services concluding transport contracts and selling tickets on behalf of a railway undertaking or for its own account.
Ticket vendor — Any retailer of rail transport services selling tickets, including through-tickets, on the basis of a contract or other arrangement between the retailer and one or more railway undertakings.
Ticketing — The generation of a ticket
TIF — International transit by rail (FR: transport international par chemin de fer)
Time frame — The period of time specified in a framework agreement within which one or several train paths are intended to be allocated under the timetable procedure.
Time zone — A region on Earth that has a uniform standard time
Timetable — Document or system that gives details of a train(s) schedule over a particular route.
Timetable — The list of commercial transport services offered by a railway undertaking during a given time interval
Timetable — A structured list of data describing the transport services offered to the public by a transport company (in this case a Railway Undertaking) during a given time period
Timetable — A schedule listing the times at which certain events, such as arrivals and departures at a transport station, are expected to take place. The timetable defines all planned train and rolling-stock movements (including technical parameters as for instance loco type, weight, length, container profile etc.) which will take place on the relevant infrastructure during the period for which it is in force.
Timetable period — A timetable period means the period of operation of a Working Timetable; it starts on the day of a timetable change (change date).
Timetabling — Defining a set of train schedules for a railway system to provide a service considering conditions such as the interaction between trains, infrastructure capacity, rolling stock, personnel, stations and depots scheduling, shunting, commercial requirements, etc. according to its validity period or application.
Timing point — A location identified in the schedule of a train where a specific time is identified. This time may be an arrival time, departure time or in the case of a train not scheduled to stop at that location the passing time.
Timing Point — A location and stopping accuracy defined in the Segment Profile for which a type (Stopping or Passing Point) and specific time is identified in the Journey Profile. This time may be an arrival time, a departure time, or in the case of a train not scheduled to stop at that location, the passing time. A Timing Point represents either a Stopping Point or a Passing Point where control by TMS is needed for throughput maximisation.
TIMS — Train Integrity Monitoring System
TIR — International carriage of goods by road (FR: transport international de marchandises par route)
TIU — Train Interface Unit
TJ — Terajoule
TJ — Tajikistan
TK — Tokelau
TK — Ton.kilometre
Tkm — Tonne-kilometre
tkm — Tonne-kilometre
TL — Timor-Leste
TLT — Train Linked Ticket
TM — Turkmenistan
TML — Tetramethyllead
TMS — Traffic Management System
TN — Tunisia
TO — Tonga
TOD — See Ticket On Departure
ToD — Ticket on Departure
ToD — Time of day
TOE — Tonne of oil equivalent
Toilet emissions — Toilet discharge emissions to the external environment.
Toilets — Requirements concerning the design and equipment of toilets (also in relation to use by people with reduced mobility). E.g. inside space, access, emergency call, hygienical requirements. Including need and design of staff toilets. Excluded: toilet emissions (see parameter 6.2.1.1 - Toilet emissions).
Tolerable risk — Estimated residual level of risk which is considered acceptable within a decision-making process when assessed against pre-defined decision-making criteria.
Toll — Special charge levied at a particular point where vehicles pass (tunnel, motorway, etc.).
Tonal sound — Sound characterized by a single frequency component or narrow band components that emerge audibly from the total sound.
Tonal sound — Sound characterized by a single frequency component or narrow-band components that emerge audibly from the total sound.
Tonne — The weight executed by the mass of a tonne and shall correspond to 9,8 kilonewtons (kN).
Tonne-kilometre (tkm) — A tonne-kilometre, abbreviated as tkm, is a unit of measure of freight transport which represents the transport of one tonne of goods (including packaging and tare weights of intermodal transport units) by a given transport mode (road, rail, air, sea, inland waterways, pipeline etc.) over a distance of one kilometre. Only the distance on the national territory of the reporting country is taken into account for national, international and transit transport.
Tonne-kilometre (tkm) — Unit of measurement of goods transport which represents the transport of one tonne of goods over a distance of one kilometre. The distance to be covered is the distance actually travelled on the considered network. To avoid double counting each country should count only the tkm performed on its territory. If it is not available, then the distance charged or estimated should be taken into account.
Tonne-kilometre offered — Unit of measurement representing the movement of one tonne of capacity available in a wagon when performing services for which it is primarily intended over one kilometre. The distance to be considered is that actually travelled. Shunting and other similar movements are excluded.
Tonne-km — The unit of measure of goods transport which represents the transport of one tonne (1 000 kilograms) of goods by rail over a distance of one kilometre. Only the distance on the national territory of the reporting country shall be taken into account.
Top management — Person or group of people who directs and controls an organisation at the highest level (ISO 9000).
Top ups — Additional financial means for defined categories of expenditures supporting a previously agreed budget
Top-level domain name registry or TLD name registry — An entity which has been delegated a specific TLD and is responsible for administering the TLD including the registration of domain names under the TLD and the technical operation of the TLD, including the operation of its name servers, the maintenance of its databases and the distribution of TLD zone files across name servers, irrespective of whether any of those operations are carried out by the entity itself or are outsourced, but excluding situations where TLD names are used by a registry only for its own use.
Topographical label — Sequence of 32 bits showing the presence or absence of a maximum of 32 optional elements (or groups of elements) in a phrase
Torch fire (See jet fire) — Combustion of material that flows from an opening under considerable pressure.
Total International transport — Total of loaded, unloaded, cross-trade and cabotage - includes transport reported by hauliers registered in reporting countries performed, completely or partially, outside these countries. Transport undertaken by hauliers registered in other countries is not included.
Total rail transport — Total rail transport (in tonne-kilometres) was calculated as a sum of national, international and transit transport, where international transport is the sum of international loaded and unloaded in the reporting country.
Tour Operator — An organiser or retailer, other than a railway undertaking, within the meaning of Article 2, points (2) and (3) of Directive 90/314/EEC
Tour operator — An organiser or retailer as defined in points (8) and (9) respectively of Article 3 of Directive (EU) 2015/2302 of the European Parliament and of the Council (11) other than a railway undertaking
Toxic cloud — Mixing and spreading of toxic gases in air, which causes clouds to grow. The mixing is the result of turbulent energy exchange that is a function of a particular wind and atmospheric temperature profile.
TP — Timing Point
TPS — Train Protection System
TR — Technical Report
TR — Trip mode
TR — Turkey
Tracing — Activity at request of finding and reconstructing the transport history of a given consignment, vehicle, equipment, package or cargo.
Track — In Railway, it is a pair of rails over which rail borne vehicles can run.
Track — A pair of rails over which rail borne vehicles can run maintained by an infrastructure manager. Metro, Tram and Light rail urban lines are excluded. In the context of the EU reporting the cumulative length of railway tracks excludes also the following: •	Lines solely used for operating touristic trains and heritage trains; •	Lines constructed solely to serve mines, forests or other industrial or agricultural installations and which are not open to public traffic; •	Private lines closed to public traffic and functionally separated (i.e. stand-alone) networks; •	Private lines used for own freight transport activities or for non-commercial passenger services and light rail tracks occasionally used by heavy rail vehicles for connectivity or transit purposes.
Track — General definition: a pair of rails over which rail borne vehicles can run. Commission Implementing Regulation on the common specifications of the register of railway infrastructure: any track used for train service movements (passing loops and meeting loops on plain line or track connections only required for train operation are not published).
Track access charge (TAC) — The amount of money that Railway Undertakings or any other Applicants pay to the IMs for running services on their tracks and using the IM's installations.
Track buckle or other track misalignment — Any fault related to the continuum and the geometry of track, requiring track to be placed out of service or immediate restriction of permitted speed.
Track condition — Information transmitted to the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment to inform the driver and/or the train of conditions ahead. This information is dedicated to other functions than the speed and distance monitoring.
Track conditions which can be transmitted — According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
Track decay rate — Rate of attenuation of vibration amplitude of either vertical or lateral bending wave motion in the rail as a function of the distance along the rail. Note 1 to entry: The track decay rate is represented by a one-third octave spectrum of values expressed in decibels per metre (dB/m) representing attenuation over distance.
Track decay rate — Rate of attenuation of vibration amplitude of either vertical or lateral bending wave motion in the rail as a function of the distance along the rail. Note 1 to entry: It is represented by a one-third octave spectrum of values expressed in decibels per metre (dB/m) representing attenuation over distance.
Track description — Information complementing the Movement Authority and providing as a minimum the, static speed profile and gradient profile. Optionally, it can contain axle load profile, track conditions, route suitability data, areas where shunting is permitted, etc.
Track design — The track design consists of cross-section defining basic dimensions and track components (for example rail, rail fastenings, sleepers, ballast) used together with operating conditions with an impact on forces related to 4.2.6, such as axle load, speed and radius of horizontal curvature.
Track free — A route being detected clear of obstacles such that permission may be given for a train to enter that route.
Track gauge — The smallest distance between lines perpendicular to the running surface intersecting each rail head profile in a range from 0 to 14 mm below the running surface.
Track gauge — The distance between the internal sides of rails on a railway line. It is generally 1.435 m.
Track gauge — Distance between the two rail heads of one track. Note 1 to entry: Common values and measurement instructions can be found in ISO 23054-1: 2022, 5.1. Note 2 to entry: Common values and measurement instructions for European networks can be found in EN 13848-1:2019, 6.1.
Track geometry — The physical arrangement of the track in terms of curvature, gradient and cant.
Track interaction and gauging — Parameter without explanation in the document
Track km — The length measured in kilometres of the railway network in Member States, whose scope is laid down in Article 2. Each track of a multiple-track railway line is to be counted.
Track loading compatibility parameters — E.g. dynamic wheel force, wheel forces exerted by a wheel set on the track (quasi static wheel force, maximum total dynamic lateral force, quasi static guiding force) including vertical acceleration.
Track occupied — An object in a route that prevents that route being offered to a train.
Track twist — Track twist is defined as the algebraic difference between two cross levels taken at a defined distance apart, usually expressed as a gradient between the two points at which the cross level is measured.
Track-km — The length measured in kilometres of the railway network in Member States where each track of a multiple track railway line is to be counted.
Track-to-train transmission — The transmission of ERTMS/ETCS messages from trackside equipment to the train via balise, loop or radio. Using intermittent transmission (balise or loop or radio infill) the information can only be transmitted to a train passing the transmission unit.
Tracking — Activity of systematically monitoring and recording the present location and status of a given consignment, vehicle, equipment, package or cargo.
Tracks connectivity to operational points — The  first  character  string  uniquely  identifies  the  track  inside the  operational  point  at  start  connected  to  this  track The second   character   string   uniquely   identifies   the   track inside  the  operational  point  at  end  connected  to  this  track
Trackside control-command and signalling — All the trackside equipment required to ensure safety and to command and control movements of trains authorised to travel on the network.
Trackside equipment — The equipment with the aim of exchanging information with the vehicle for safely supervising train circulation. The information exchanged between track and trains can be either continuous or intermittent according to the ERTMS/ETCS level of application and to the nature of the information itself.
Trackside HABD TSI compliant — Specific  for  the French, Italian  and Swedish networks. Trackside hot axle box detector TSI compliant.
Traction current — Electricity to supply electrified rail networks.
Traction performance requirements — Required traction performance as, e.g. acceleration, traction wheel/rail adhesion control, etc.
Traction unit — A powered vehicle able to move itself and other vehicles to which it may be coupled.
Traction unit — A railway vehicle provided with a means of traction.
Traction unit / tractive unit — A railway vehicle provided with a means of traction'. More specifically: a locomotive or a self-powered unit (multiple unit, self-propelled rail vehicle or road-rail vehicle operating in rail mode) in a multiple-unit train.
Traction/Brake Lever — Lever(s) used by the driver to drive the train. It may be composed by one or more levers (e.g. traction lever, EDB lever, pneumatic brake lever, etc) but from the ATO-OB functional point of view it has only three different positions: a)        Traction: when it is requesting the rolling stock to traction; b)        Neutral: when it is requesting the rolling stock neither to traction nor braking; c)        Braking: when it is requesting the rolling stock to brake.
Tractive vehicle — A vehicle equipped with prime mover and motor, or with motor only, intended either for hauling other vehicles (a ‘locomotive’) or for hauling other vehicles and/or for the carriage of passengers and/or goods (a ‘railcar’).
Tractive vehicle-kilometre — Unit of measurement representing any movement of a tractive vehicle over a distance of one kilometre. Tractive vehicles running light (without hauling a load) are included. Shunting movements are excluded.
Trader — Any natural person or any legal person, irrespective of whether privately or publicly owned, who is acting, including through any other person acting in his name or on his behalf, for purposes relating to his trade, business, craft or profession in relation to contracts covered by this Directive, whether acting in the capacity of organiser, retailer, trader facilitating a linked travel arrangement or as a travel service provider;
Traffic Code — Line parameter. A combination of Traffic Codes defines the TSI Category of Line (see TSI INF point 4.2.1 (2))
Traffic control system — A large-scale distributed industrial control system. A train-traffic-control system has many station-level subsystems doing the traffic control, several train-line-level systems managing the station-level subsystems, and a central supervising system. Train traffic control is performed from control centres, where train dispatchers monitor and control the traffic.
Traffic volume — Measure of transport activity, expressed in, for example, vehicle-kilometres or tonne-kilometres.
Trailer — It is designed to be hauled by a road motor vehicle. This category excludes agricultural trailers and caravans.
Trailer — A non-powered vehicle for the carriage of goods, intended to be coupled to a motor vehicle, excluding semi-trailers.
Trailer — Any vehicle intended to be coupled to a motor vehicle excluding semi-trailers, and constructed and equipped for the carriage of goods.
Trailer car — Railway vehicle that does not provide tractive effort as part of a trainset.
Train — Operational formation consisting of one or more units.
Train — A train is defined as (a) traction unit(s) with or without coupled vehicles with train data available operating between two or more defined points according to an allocated train path and identified by means of a unique train running number.
Train — Definition of OPE TSI: A train is defined as (a) traction unit(s) with or without coupled railway vehicles with train data available operating between two or more defined points.
Train — Operational formation consisting of several units
Train — One or more railway vehicles hauled by one or more locomotives or railcars, or one railcar travelling alone, running under a given number or specific designation from an initial fixed point to a terminal fixed point, including a light engine, i.e. a locomotive travelling on its own.
Train — One or more railway vehicles hauled by one or more traction units, or one traction unit travelling alone, running under a given operational number from an initial fixed point to a terminal fixed point.
Train — One or more railway vehicles hauled by one or more locomotives or railcars, or one railcar travelling alone, running under a given number or specific designation from an initial fixed point to a terminal fixed point. A light engine, that is to say, a locomotive travelling on its own, is not considered to be a train.
Train — It is a formation provided with traction, consisting of one or more vehicles and prepared for operation.
Train — Formation consisting of one or more units capable for self-propelled operation.
Train — Single vehicle or a number of coupled vehicles/units operating on a guided ground transport system. Note 1 to entry: See Table 1. Table 1 - Definitions of rolling stock formations Articulated Vehicle - see unit. Unit - minimum operational formation of articulated cars. Train - refers to any formation which may operate in service, it may comprise of one or more units coupled together. Non-articulated Vehicle - any single car on its running gear. Unit - minimum operational formation comprising of one or more vehicles coupled together. Train - refers to any formation which may operate in-service, may be either a single unit or one or more units coupled together.
Train at Standstill — A train is considered to be at standstill when its speed has decreased to 3 km/h or less. [RD3]
Train category — Synonym for Service brand (see code list B.4.7009)
Train category — Categorisation of trains defined in code list B.4.7009
Train cleaning facilities — Train internal and external cleaning, e.g. external cleaning through a washing plant.
Train composition — Train composition is the sequence of vehicles in a train. This means both the formation of vehicles within a train and their specific vehicle characteristics.
Train Composition Message — The Responsible RU shall send the ‘Train Composition message’ defining the composition of the train to the next Responsible RU involved in the freight service and to the Lead RU. According to network statement, the ‘Train Composition message’ is also to be sent from the Responsible RU to the IM(s). The definition of the mandatory structure of Train Composition message and the elements to be followed are described in the document ‘TAF TSI – Annex D.2: Appendix F – TAF TSI Data and Message Model’ listed in Appendix I. Minimum elements to be delivered for the message exchange between RU and IM for the purpose Train Composition are defined in Chapter 4.2.2.7.2 of Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/773 (OPE TSI).
Train crew — Members of the on-board staff of a train, who are certified as competent and appointed by a railway undertaking to carry out specific, designated safety related tasks on the train, for example the driver or the guard.
Train data — Information which describes the characteristics of a train.
Train data — Defined set of data which gives information about the train. Data that characterises a train and which is acquired by ERTMS/ETCS in order to perform a mission.
Train despatch — The indication to the person driving the train that all station or depot activities are completed and that, as far as the staff responsible are concerned, movement authority has been granted for the train.
Train detection — The proof of the presence or absence of trains on a defined section of line.
Train detection — Safe recognition of the presence or absence of any trains on a defined section of the track or at a given point.
Train detection system — The equipment installed trackside, which detects the presence or absence of vehicles either on an entire line of route or on a local section of it.
Train driver — A person capable and authorised to drive trains, including locomotives, shunting locomotives, work trains, maintenance railway vehicles or trains for the carriage of passengers or goods by rail in an autonomous, responsible and safe manner.
Train Driver — A person capable and authorised to drive trains, including locomotives, shunting locomotives, work trains, maintenance railway vehicles or trains for the carriage of passengers or goods by rail in an autonomous, responsible and safe manner. [RD4]
Train driver licence — The licence demonstrating that the driver satisfies minimum conditions as regards medical requirements, basic education and general professional skills in conformity.  The licence shall identify the driver and the issuing authority and shall state the duration of its validity. The licence shall comply with the requirements of Comission Regulation (EU) No 36/2010 .
Train Estimated time of Arrival — The Estimated time of arrival of a train at a specific point, e.g. handover point, interchange point, train destination
Train Hold — The functionality that allows trains to be held at a defined location for operational reasons.
Train Holding Brake — Function ensuring that the train will not move while it is at standstill. [RD1]
Train Information System (TIS) — RNE web-based application which visualises international trains from origin to destination. It supports international train management by delivering real-time train data concerning international passenger and freight trains. The relevant data is processed directly from the Infrastructure Managers’ systems. Applicants and operators of service facilities may also be granted access to TIS by signing the  TIS User agreement with RNE.
Train integrity — The level of belief in the train being complete and not having left coaches or wagons behind.
Train integrity confirmation from on-board (not  from driver) necessary for line access — Indication   whether    train   confirmation from  on-board  is  required  to  access  the line for safety reasons.
Train interface unit — The unit, inside the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment, that provides the interface between the ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment and the train.
Train is Moving — A train is considered to be moving when its speed is not 0.
Train is Stopped — A train is considered to be stopped when its speed is 0.
Train length — The length of a train, which can run on a certain line in normal operation.
Train loading and unloading — This may mean 2 very different things: the loading and unloading of goods at train loading facilities ('loading bay' or 'loading dock'); or the total number of passengers carried by a train. Train loading may be even, when the same number of passengers is sitting in every coach, or uneven, when some coaches are fuller than others; the load factor may be higher than 100% if all seats are occupied and some passengers are standing.
Train movement — When vehicles are moved with train data available, as a rule from station to station, and as a rule under the authority of proceed aspects from main signals, or similar procedures.
Train operation — The actions required to operate a train service. At the technical level, train operation can take several forms, such as Multiple Unit Operation and Push-Pull Operation.
Train orientation, ETCS — If there is an active cab, this one defines the orientation of the train, i.e. the side of the active cab is considered as determining the front of the train. If no cab is active, the train orientation is defined by the last active cab. Exception: from the time the first Supervised Manoeuvre authorisation is received to the time the mission is either ended or continued in Non Leading mode, the train orientation is determined by the direction of the Movement Authority in the last received Supervised Manoeuvre authorisation, regardless of the position of the engine in the shunting consist and of which of its cab(s) is active.
Train path — The infrastructure capacity needed to run a train between two places at a given time.
Train path — See ‘path’
Train path — The train route defined in time and space
Train path — The infrastructure capacity needed to run a train between two places over a given period.
Train path catalogue — A catalogue of available train paths, as identified by an Infrastructure Manager's capacity analysis.
Train Performance Management (TPM) — It is the complete and regular process for monitoring, analysing and improving performance of international trains. The train performance management process is composed of 5 main phases (Definition phase, Data collection, Performance analysis, Action planning and Action Implementation).
Train position confidence interval — The distance interval within which the ERTMS/ETCS on-board assumes the actual train position is, with a defined probability. It comprises the odometer over-reading and under-reading amounts, plus twice the location accuracy of the reference balise group.
Train preparation — Process for ensuring that a train is in a fit condition to enter service, that the train equipment is correctly deployed and the train composition matches the train's designated route(s). It includes the coupling or decoupling of vehicles, connecting or disconnecting of pipes, services, cabling and the indication of a rear end signal.   Train preparation also includes brake configuration setting and the inspections, tests, and checks before departure. Note: The movement to get a vehicle in or out of the train composition is a shunting movement.
Train preparer — Staff in charge of the preparation of a train.
Train preparer — Performer in charge of the preparation of a train.
Train protection legacy system — Indication  of  which  class  B  system  is  in stalled
Train Protection System (TPS) — A system that helps to enforce obedience to signals and speed restrictions.
Train refuelling facilities — Parameter without explanation in the document
Train running interrupted — The continuation of the train is unknown based on local circumstances at the time and in the opinion of the parties involved. If the Delay is known, the infrastructure manager sends a train running forecast message
Train running number — A number under which the train is operated.
Train station — Railway establishment used for loading and unloading of passenger and/or goods, for formation, dispatch, reception and temporary stabling of trains and/or for stabling and marshalling of rolling stock. Halts are excluded. Sometimes also referred to as rail or railway station.
Train Time of Estimated Arrival — Estimated Time of Arrival of a train at a specific point, e.g. handover point, interchange point, destination of the train.
Train Trip — Initiated when a train passes an EOA/LOA, excluding any occasion when a suppress facility is used, and causes an immediate application of the emergency brake.
Train-kilometre — Unit of measurement representing the movement of a train over one kilometre. The distance to be considered is the distance actually travelled.
Train-km — The unit of measure representing the movement of a train over one kilometre. The distance used is the distance actually run, if available, otherwise the standard network distance between the origin and destination shall be used. Only the distance on the national territory of the reporting country shall be taken into account.
Train-to-trach transmission — The transmission of ERTMS/ETCS messages from the train to trackside equipment via radio.
Trainer — A person with relevant skills and competence to prepare, organise and conduct training courses.
Training centre — Entity accredited or recognised by the competent authority to give training courses.
Trainset — Fixed formation that can operate as a train; it is by definition not intended to be reconfigured, except within a workshop environment. It is composed of only motored or of motored and non-motored vehicles.
Trainset — Operationally indivisible composition of railcar(s) and railcar trailer(s) or locomotive(s) and passenger railway vehicle(s).
Trainset — Indivisible block of railcar(s) and railcar trailer(s) or locomotive(s) and passenger railway vehicle(s). (Included are trainsets that are technically divisible but are normally kept in the same configuration. One trainset may be coupled to another one. Each trainset may have more than one tractive vehicle.)
Trainset — Fixed formation(s) that can operate as a train.
Tram (streetcar) — Passenger or freight road vehicle designed to seat more than nine persons (including the driver) or to transport freight, which is rail borne and connected to electric conductors or powered by diesel engine. The tramway is generally integrated into the urban road system. Also mentioned under definition B.II-18.
Tram (streetcar) — A passenger road vehicle designed to seat more than nine persons (including the driver), which is connected to electric conductors or powered by diesel engine and which is rail-borne.
Tram line (streetcar line) — A railway line mainly installed on and well integrated into the urban road system. The tramcars are powered either electrically or by diesel engine, particularly for special rail borne road vehicles. Also known as trolley car line, tramcar line or streetcar line.
Tram system — UGT operated on infrastructure shared with road traffic or separate infrastructure, or both. Note 1 to entry: Tram systems having some sections segregated from road traffic can be called a light rail system (LRS). Note 2 to entry: Road traffic includes motor vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists, wheelchair users, etc.
Tram vehicle — Railway vehicle designed to run in a tram system. Note 1 to entry: When a tram system is designated as light rail system, the term "light rail vehicle" is also used for railway vehicles operated on such systems.
Tram-train — Vehicle designed for combined use on both a light-rail infrastructure and a heavy-rail infrastructure.
Tram-train — A vehicle designed for combined use on both a light-rail infrastructure and a heavy-rail infrastructure.
Tram-train — Passenger vehicle designed for combined use on both a light-rail infrastructure and a heavy-rail infrastructure.
Trans European Network for Transport (TEN-T) — TEN-T is a European Commission policy directed towards the implementation and development of a Europe-wide network of roads, railway lines, inland waterways, maritime shipping routes, ports, airports and rail-road terminals.
Trans-European digital public services — Digital services provided by Union entities or public sector bodies to one another or to natural or legal persons in the Union, and requiring interaction across Member State borders, among Union entities or between Union entities and public sector bodies, by means of their network and information systems.
Trans-European Network (TEN) classification of track — Indication of the part of the trans-European network the line belongs to.
Trans-European networks (TENs) — The function of trans-European networks, abbreviated as TENs, is to create a modern and effective infrastructure for transport, energy and telecommunications linking European countries and regions. In the European Union (EU) they are essential to the proper operation of the single market, since they ensure free movement of goods, people and services. TENs exist in three sectors of activity: - Trans-European Transport Networks (TEN-T) cover road and intermodal transport, waterways and seaports, and the European high-speed railway network. Intelligent transport management systems also fall into this category, as does Galileo, Europe's satellite radio navigation system. - Trans-European Energy Networks (TEN-E) cover the electricity and natural gas sectors. They help to create a single energy market and contribute to security of energy supply. - Trans-European Telecommunications Networks (eTEN) have as their aim the deployment of telecommunication network-based services. They focus strongly on public services and are at the heart of the initiative ‘eEurope – An Information Society for All’. The construction of Trans-European Networks is also an important element for economic growth and the creation of employment.
Trans-European rail network — The rail network as described in Annex 1 to Directive 2008/57/EC
Trans-European Transport Network (TEN-T) — A network of highways, railway lines, inland waterways and other transport networks, which is in part funded by the European Union. The goal of the TEN-T program is to connect all European regions to the single market.
Trans-shipment — See Transshipment
Transfer — Relocation of appropriations from one budget line to another, in the course of the financial year.  It is an exception to the budgetary principle of specification expressly authorised by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union under the conditions laid down in the Financial Regulation.
Transfer — Complete or partial handover (3.1.2.8) of processes to an internal site (multi-site organizations) or an external organization
Transhipment — The operation of moving intermodal loading units from one means of transport to another.
Transhipment — See Transshipment
Transit — The carriage of goods or passengers (without loading or unloading) and the movement of unladen vehicles across the territory of a Contracting Party.
Transit — Crossing territory of the Union without loading or unloading goods, and/or without picking up passengers or setting them down in territory of the Union.
Transit — Rail transport through the reporting country between two places (a place of loading/embarkation and a place of unloading/disembarkation) outside the reporting country. Transport operations involving loading/embarkation or unloading/disembarkation of goods/passengers at the border of the reporting country from/onto another mode of transport are not considered as transit.
Transition — Controlled change between the different ETCS levels.
Transition buffer — In case of level transition or RBC/RBC handover, it refers to the on-board storage containing trackside information not used immediately and that is evaluated at the time the level transition is performed or at the time the Accepting RBC becomes the supervising one, respectively.
Transition point — Point where a transition between ETCS levels takes place.
Transitions — Requirements related to transitions between national on-board signalling systems and ETCS; between ETCS and ETCS etc., at the borders of or within the Member State.
Transitions — The controlled changes between operating modes and / or levels
Transitory flaming — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of between 1 s and 4 s.
Transitory flaming — Existence of flame on or over the surface of the specimen for periods of between 1 and 10 s.
Transmission layer — In the stack of protocols, the component that transmits data independently from their meaning. The exchange of data between the transmission layers of two connected systems takes place at transmission level
Transmission system operator — A ‘transmission system operator’ as defined in Article 2, point (35), of Directive (EU) 2019/944: (`transmission system operator’ means a natural or legal person who is responsible for operating, ensuring the maintenance of and, if necessary, developing the transmission system in a given area and, where applicable, its interconnections with other systems, and for ensuring the long-term ability of the system to meet reasonable demands for the transmission of electricity).
Transmodel — A reference data model for Public Transport operations developed within several European projects. It is published as CEN standard EN12896.
Transparency and recognition of practices — The extent to which risk management decisions are set out in clear and consistent terms such that they can be scrutinised and the extent to which this in turn facilitates recognition.
Transponder — See Balise and Eurobalise
Transport chain — Sequence of transport modes used to move the goods from their origin to their destination. Along the chain one or more transhipments take place. The goods may not necessarily stay in the same loading unit along the full transport chain. Stuffing and stripping of an intermodal transport unit may take place during the journey.
Transport composition — Several transport units operated together with one or more hauling/pulling/pushing vehicle(s). Typical transport compositions are: ▶   vessels loaded with one or several transport units, ▶   trains composed with several transport units (wagons), ▶   road tractor with a semi-trailer, a trailer or several trailers.
Transport contract — A contract of carriage for consideration or free of charge between a railway undertaking or a ticket vendor and the passenger for the provision of one or more transport services.
Transport contract — A contract of rail carriage for reward or free of charge between a railway undertaking and a passenger for the provision of one or more transport services.
Transport document — The consignment note in accordance with the Contract of Carriage (see CIM), the wagon note in accordance with the General Contract of Use for Wagons (GCU) (Published by the GCU Bureau, Avenue Louise, 500, BE–1050 Brussels, www.gcubureau.org.)  or another transport document meeting the provisions of section 5.4.1.
Transport document — Document which confirms the contract of carriage for passengers (ticket), for luggage (luggage voucher) or for vehicles (carriage voucher).
Transport event — Any type of occurrence arising from transport activities involving a freight transport unit. Transport events considered by this risk management framework are those occurring at any time during transport operations, including loading, filling, carriage, unloading and emptying, as well as any temporary stops required by the transport operations (for example parks, sidings, trans- boarding, shunting yards…).
Transport greenhouse gases — Transport greenhouse gases (GHGs) are the greenhouse gases in the context of transport: - carbon dioxide (CO2), - methane (CH4) and - nitrous oxide (N2O).
Transport index (TI) — Assigned to a package, overpack or container, or to unpackaged LSA-I or SCO-I or SCO-III, for the carriage of radioactive material, means a number which is used to provide control over radiation exposure.
Transport Market Study (TMS) — REGULATION (EU) No 913/2010, Art. 14: 'The Management Board shall evaluate the need for capacity to be allocated to freight trains running on the freight corridor taking into account the transport market study referred to in Article 9(3) of the Regulation 913/2010/EU, the requests for infrastructure capacity relating to the past and present working timetables and the framework agreements.' Art. 9 explains that the study shall cover the different types of traffic, both freight and passenger, and review where necessary the socio-economic costs and benefits stemming from the establishment of the freight corridor. The implementation plan of each RFC shall contain the essential elements of the study, which shall be periodically updated.
Transport mode — A generic type of vehicle capable of transporting passengers (train, plane, bus, etc.)
Transport mode — It refers to the way in which passengers and/or goods can be transported. Transport modes for both passengers and goods may include: - rail; - maritime (sea); - road; - inland waterways - air. Transport modes for passengers only may include: - passenger car; - powered two-wheelers; - bus; - coach; - tram; - metro. Transport modes for goods only include: - pipelines. The modal split of transport describes the relative share of each mode of transport, for example by road, rail or sea. It is based on passenger-kilometres (p-km) for passenger transport and tonne-kilometres (t-km) for freight or goods transport. The modal split is usually defined for a specific geographic area and/or time period. In practice, an analysis of the modal split may exclude certain modes of transport. For example, the analysis may be limited to inland transport and therefore exclude sea transport and air transport.
Transport mode — Category of means of transport (road, rail, aviation, shipping, etc.)
Transport of driver accompanied goods road motor vehicle — Transport of a complete goods road motor vehicle, accompanied by the driver, by another mode of transport (for example by sea or rail).
Transport of goods by rail — The movement of goods using railway vehicles between the place of loading and the place of unloading.
Transport of passengers by rail — The movement of passengers using railway vehicles between the place of embarkation and the place of disembarkation. The transport of passengers by metro, tram and/or light rail is excluded.
Transport of road goods road motor vehicle, unaccompanied by the driver — Transport of a goods road motor vehicle or a trailer, by another mode of transport (for example by sea or rail), not accompanied by a driver.
Transport operator/carrier — The person responsible for the carriage of goods, either directly or using a third party. In the definition, a person means either a physical or legal person or a company.
Transport service — A commercial transport service or transport service under public service contract linking two or more locations, offered by a railway undertaking according to a published timetable. A transport service is normally performed with a specific transport mode
Transport service — A transport service is the provision of vehicles and other facilities to move people or goods from point A to point B. Thus freight services consist of the physical movement and handling of goods (incl. pick-up, consolidation, actual transport, trans-shipment, delivery) whilst passenger services make it possible for people to travel from one place to another. Maritime transport services consist of three types of activities: (i) international maritime transport (the actual transportation service until the destination port); (ii) maritime auxiliary services (any activities related to cargo manipulation in ports and on ships); and (iii) port services (activities related solely to ship management in ports). A public transport service has a considerable number of dimensions, such as: network structure, pricing, spacing of lines and stops, frequency of service, and vehicle size. The quality of transport services (and 'service levels) has become an important issue in the EU, and includes quality in terms of 'capacity', 'transport service' and 'traffic flows'. In passenger rail transport, speed and comfort are seen as the prime quality of service indicators. 'Inter-modal' refers to transport services which make use of more than one transport mode (also known as 'multi-modal' services).
Transport service provider — Any private or public company authorised to transport people in domestic or international passenger traffic. A ‘transport service provider’ accepts travel documents issued by the accredited sales points of its distributors. It plays the role of the contractual carrier with which the passenger has entered into a contract of carriage. Execution of the transport service may be entrusted, in part or in full, to a substitute carrier
Transport unit — A single road or railway vehicle, or any type of container which can be carried on a single road or railway vehicle or in a vessel.
Transshipment — Moving ITUs from one means of transport to another.
Transshipment / trans-shipment / transhipment — Transshipment (sometimes also trans-shipment or transhipment) means the unloading of goods from one ship and its loading into another to complete a journey to a further destination, even when the cargo may have to remain ashore some time before its onward journey. But the term can also be applied more generally to other transport modes, such as freight transport by road or rail or air, or any combination of them.
Transverse voltage limits for compatibility voice/data circuits — Parameter without explanation in the document
Travel agent — A point of sale for railway tickets to passengers accredited by the carrier
Travel document — See transport document
Travel pass or season ticket — A ticket for an unlimited number of journeys which provides the authorised holder with rail travel on a particular route or network during a specified period
Travel service — (a) carriage of passengers; (b) accommodation which is not intrinsically part of carriage of passengers and is not for residential purposes; (c) rental of cars, other motor vehicles within the meaning of Article 3(11) of Directive 2007/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (16), or motorcycles requiring a Category A driving licence in accordance with point (c) of Article 4(3) of Directive 2006/126/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (17); (d) any other tourist service not intrinsically part of a travel service within the meaning of points (a), (b) or (c).
Traveller — Any person who is seeking to conclude a contract, or is entitled to travel on the basis of a contract concluded, within the scope of this Directive;
Tray — (Class 1) a sheet of metal, plastics, fibreboard or other suitable material which is placed in the inner, intermediate or outer packaging and achieves a close-fit in such packaging. The surface of the tray may be shaped so that packagings or articles can be inserted, held secure and separated from each other.
Trespasser — Any person present on railway premises where such presence is forbidden, with the exception of a level crossing user
Triangular transport operations involving third countries — Any carriage of passengers or goods from the territory of one Contracting Party to a third country, and vice versa, by a vehicle registered in the territory of the other Contracting Party, whether or not, in the course of the same journey and using the normal route, the vehicle travels through the country in which it is registered.
Trip — Irrevocable application of the emergency brakes by ETCS until the train/shunting composition is at a standstill.
Trip — Irrevocable application of the emergency brakes by ETCS until the train / shunting movement is at a standstill.
Trip mode — ERTMS/ETCSERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode (e.g. entered when passing an EOA), resulting in an application of the emergency brake that can only be revoked at standstill and with additional precautions.
Trip plan — For wagon or Intermodal unit shows the planned reference trip of the wagon/Intermodal unity.
TRIPs — Trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights
TRK — Trackside
TRN — Train Running Number
Trust fund — Fund established for a specific purpose with financial contributions from the EU budget and one or more donors and administered by an administrative agent, the Trustee.
Trust service — An electronic service normally provided for remuneration which consists of: (a) the creation, verification, and validation of electronic signatures, electronic seals or electronic time stamps, electronic registered delivery services and certificates related to those services, or (b) the creation, verification and validation of certificates for website authentication; or (c) the preservation of electronic signatures, seals or certificates related to those services.
Trust service — A trust service as defined in Article 3, point (16), of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014.
Trust service provider — A natural or a legal person who provides one or more trust services either as a qualified or as a non-qualified trust service provider.
Trust service provider — A trust service provider as defined in Article 3, point (19), of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014.
TS — Technical Specification
TS — Trackside
TSI — Technical Specifications for Interoperability
TSI — Technical Specifications for Interoperability
TSI — Technical Specification for Interoperability
TSI — See Technical Specification for Interoperability
TSI — Technical Specification for Interoperability adopted in accordance with Directives 96/48/EC, 2001/16/EC or 2008/57/EC, according to which each subsystem or part of a subsystem is covered in order to meet the essential requirements and ensure the interoperability of the rail system.
TSI — Technical Specification for Interoperability for the trans-European conventional rail system.
TSI compliance of in service values for switches and crossings — Switches and crossings are maintained to in service limit dimension as specified in TSI.
TSM — Target Speed Monitoring
TSR — Temporary Speed Restriction
TT — Trinidad and Tobago
TTI — Time to Indication
TTR for Smart Capacity Management (TTR) — A project launched in order to improve the European capacity management process. TTR stands for TimeTable Redesign.
TTSM — Timetable Speed Management
TTW — Tank-to-wheel
TU — Transport unit
Tube — (Class 2)s a pressure receptacle of seamless or composite construction having a water capacity exceeding 150 litres and of not more than 3 000 litres.
TUC — Trades Union Congress
Tunnel identification — Unique tunnel identification or unique number within Member State.
Tunnel identification — Unique tunnel identification or unique tunnel number within MS.
TV — Tuvalu
TW — Taiwan (Province of China)
Twenty-foot equivalent unit (TEU) — Twenty-foot equivalent unit, abbreviated as TEU, is a unit of volume used in maritime and rail transport statistics, equivalent to a 20-foot ISO container.
TWh — Terawatt – hour
Twistlock — Standard mechanism on handling equipment which engages and locks into the corner fittings of ITU; also used on ships and vehicles to fix ITUs.
Type — A vehicle type defining the basic design characteristics of the vehicle as covered by a type or design examination certificate described in the relevant verification module.
Type ID — An identification for the type composed of the type number (parameter 0.1, number composed of 10 digits), the variant (parameter 0.2, alphanumeric composed of three characters) and the version (parameter 0.4, alphanumeric composed of three characters): TypeID = Type number+Variant+Version = XX-XXX-XXXX-X-ZZZ-VVV
Type of construction — The basic design characteristics of the vehicle as covered by a type examination certificate or design examination certificate described respectively in assessment modules SB and SH1 of the UTP GEN-D.
Type of contact line system — Indication of the type of the contact line system.
Type of operation — The type characterised by passenger transport, including or excluding high-speed services, freight transport, including or excluding dangerous goods services, and shunting services only.
Type of operation — The type characterised by passenger transport, including or excluding high-speed services, freight transport, including or excluding dangerous goods services, and shunting services only (Directive (EU) 2016/798).
Type of operational point — Type of facility in relation to the dominating operational functions.
Type of signal — Signalling  information  for  Route  Book  compilation.
Type of track circuits or axle counters to which specific checks are needed — Reference  to   the   technical  specification  of   train  detection system,  in  accordance  with  the  specification  referenced  in Appendix  A-1,  index  [D]
Type of track gauge changeover facility — Type of track gauge changeover facility
Type of train detection system — Indication of  types of  train detection systems installed.
Type test — measurement performed to prove that, or to check if, a unit delivered by the manufacturer complies with the noise specifications.
Type test for noise emission of railbound units — One or more tests performed to prove that a product is capable of conforming to all relevant requirements of a specification.
Types of cargo carried — Goods in transport may be classified according to the UNECE – Codes for types of cargo, packages and packaging materials, Recommendation 21, Geneva March 1986. The cargo classes are: •	Liquid bulk; •	Solid bulk; •	Large freight container; •	Other freight container; •	Palletised goods; •	Pre-slung goods; •	Mobile, self-propelled units; •	Other mobile units; •	Other cargo types.
Types of consignment — The main categories are: a)	Full train load: Any consignment comprising a train with one or several wagon loads transported together for one consignor with no change in train composition from a single point of loading to a single point of unloading. Sometimes also referred to as Unit train. b)	Full wagon load: Any consignment of goods requiring the exclusive use of a wagon throughout its journey whether the full wagon loading capacity is utilised or not; wagons in a full train load are excluded. Sometimes also referred to as carload. c)	Smalls/small load: Any consignment other than full train loads or full wagon loads. Sometimes also referred to as LCL (Less than carload).
Types of containers — The main types of containers, as defined by ISO Standards Handbook on Freight Containers are: a)	General purpose containers. b)	Specific purpose containers: •	closed ventilated container •	open top container •	platform-based container open sided •	platform-based container open sided with complete superstructure •	platform-based container open sided with incomplete superstructure and fixed ends •	platform-based container open sided with incomplete superstructure and folding ends •	platform (container) c)	Specific cargo containers: •	thermal container •	insulated container •	refrigerated container – (expendable refrigerant) •	mechanically refrigerated container •	heated container •	refrigerated and heated container •	tank container •	dry bulk container •	named cargo container (such as automobile, livestock and others); and •	air mode container.
Types of train — The main categories being considered are: a)	Freight (Goods) train: Train for the carriage of goods composed of one or more wagons and, possibly, vans moving either empty or under load. b)	Passenger train: Train for the carriage of passengers composed of one or more passenger railway vehicles and, possibly, vans moving either empty or under load. c)	Mixed train: Train composed of passenger railway vehicles and of wagons. d)	Other trains: Trains moving solely for the requirements of the railway enterprise, which involve no payments to third parties. Sub-categories of passenger trains include: •	Touristic trains: Train for the carriage of passengers not intended for practical transportation but mainly as a tour or an activity to do for touristic, entertainment, and/or educational purposes including heritage trains. •	Heritage trains: Designed to be as museums or attractions for touristic, entertainment and/or educational purposes.
TZ — Tanzania, the United Republic of
T_NVCONTACT — Maximum  time  without  a  safe  message  from  Radio  Block Center  before  train  reacts  in seconds. According   the   specification   referenced   in   Appendix   A-1, index  [C]
T_NVOVTRP — Maximum  time  for  overriding  the  train  trip  in seconds According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
UA — Ukraine
UBS — Unified Braking Scheme
UCA function — User Creation and Administration function
UCLAF — Unit for the Coordination of Fraud Prevention
UDMP — Unauthorised Direction Movement Protection
UG — Uganda
UHF — Ultra-high frequency
UHT — Ultra-heat-treated (milk or cream)
UIC — International Union of Railways (Union Internationale des Chemins de fer)
UIC — The International Union of Railways (UIC, 16 rue Jean Rey, F-75015 Paris).
UIC — International Union of Railways
UIC — Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer
UIC — International Union of Railways (Union Internationale des Chemins de Fer)
UIC — Union Internationale des Chemins de fer
UIC — International Union of Railways [Union Internationale des Chemins de fer]
UIC — International Union of Railways [Union international des chemins de fer]
UIC — International Union of Railways [Union internationale des chemins de fer]
UIP — International   Union   of   Private   Wagons   Owners   (Union   Internationale d’associations de Propriétaires de wagons de particuliers)
UIRR — International  Union  of  Combined  Road–Rail  Transport  Companies  (Union Internationale des opérateurs de transport combiné Rail-Route)
UITP — International   Association   of   Public   Transport   (Union   Internationale   des Transports Publics)
UK correction — The rebate to be granted to the UK to reduce its contribution to the EU budget. It was agreed at the Fontainebleau European Council in France on 25 and 26 June 1984 by the then 10 Member States (Germany, Belgium, Denmark, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the UK)
UM — United States Minor Outlying Islands (the)
Umax2  for  the  French  network — Highest  non-permanent  voltage  (Umax2)  for  France  on  lines not  compliant  with  values  defined  in  the  the  specification referenced  in  Appendix  A-2,  index  [1]
UMTS — Universal mobile telecommunications system
UN — Unfitted mode
UN — United Nations
UN — Unfitted
UN Model Regulations — Model Regulations annexed to the twenty-third revised edition of the Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods published by the United Nations ST/SG/AC.10/1/Rev.23).
UN number — The four-figure identification number of the substance or article taken from the UN Model Regulations.
UN number — Number allocated to a given dangerous good as reported in the Table A of RID/ADR/ADN
UN Regulation — A regulation annexed to the agreement concerning the adoption of uniform technical prescriptions for wheeled vehicles, equipment and parts which can be fitted and or used on wheeled vehicles and the conditions for reciprocal recognition of approvals granted on the basis of these prescriptions (1958 agreement, as amended).
UN/LOCODE — United Nations Code for Trade and Transport Locations
Unaccompanied combined transport — Transport of a road vehicle or an intermodal transport unit (ITU, see 4.1), not accompanied by the driver, using another mode of transport (for example a ferry or a train).
Unauthorised movement — To pass: - a trackside colour light signal or semaphore at danger, or an order to STOP where a Train Protection system (TPS) is not operational, -  the end of a safety related movement authority provided in a TPS, - a point communicated by verbal or written authorisation laid down in Regulations, - stop boards (buffer stops are not included) or hand signals. Any case in which a vehicle without any traction unit attached or a train that is unattended runs away past a signal at danger is not included. Any case in which, for any reason, the signal is not turned to danger in time to allow the driver to stop the train before the signal is not included.
Unauthorised persons on railway premises — Any persons present on railway premises where such presence is forbidden, with the exception of level crossing users.
Unavoidable and extraordinary circumstances — A situation beyond the control of the party who invokes such a situation and the consequences of which could not have been avoided even if all reasonable measures had been taken;
UNBRO — United Nations Border Relief Operation
UNCED — United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
Uncommissioned area — Piece of track where ERTMS/ETCS is being installed but has not yet been commissioned and shall thus not be taken into account.
UNCTAD — United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
Under-reading amount — The distance the train may have travelled further than the estimated position. The distance is estimated by the ERTMS/ETCS-on-board equipment taking into account the odometer inaccuracy plus the error for the detection of a balise location, as defined in the Eurobalise specifications.
Undertaking — Any natural person, any legal person, whether profit-making or not, any association or group of persons without legal personality, whether profit-making or not, or any official body, whether having its own legal personality or being dependent upon an authority having such personality.
Undertaking — See "Enterprise"
Undesirable event (UE) — An undesirable event is any predictable deviation in a process or a system and is normally the first event on the left-side of the bow tie. The UE are, most of the time, generic events associated with organisational or human behaviour, that are ultimately considered as a cause of the critical event.
UNDP — United Nations Development Programme
UNDRO — United Nations Disaster Relief Organisation
UNECE — The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE, Palais des Nations, 8-14 avenue de la Paix, CH-1211 Geneva 10).
UNECE — United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
UNEP — United Nations Environment Programme
UNESCO — United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
Unfiller — An enterprise that removes goods from a tank (including a tank-wagon, wagon with demountable tank, portable tank or tank-container), a wagon, a large container or small container for carriage in bulk, or from a battery-wagon or multiple-element gas container.
Unfitted area — See NON-EQUIPPED LINE
Unfitted mode — ERTMS/ETCS on-board equipment mode allowing a fitted train to run in an unfitted area.
Unguided length of an obtuse crossing — Portion of obtuse crossing where there is no guidance of the wheel described as ‘unguided length’ in the specification referenced in Appendix T, Index [17].
UNHCR — Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNICE — Union of Industrial and Employers’ Confederations of Europe
UNICEF — United Nations Children’s Fund
UNIFE — The European Rail Industry association
UNIFE — Union of the European Railway  Industries (Union des Industries Ferroviaires Européennes)
Unilateral Approval — For the carriage of radioactive material, means an approval of a design which is required to be given by the competent authority of the country of origin of the design only.  If the country of origin is not an RID Contracting State, the approval shall require validation by the competent authority of an RID Contracting State (see 6.4.22.8).
Union — The European Union, the European Atomic Energy Community, or both, as the context may require.
Union entities — The Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies set up by, or on the basis of, the TEU, the Treaty on the functioning of European Union or the Treaty establishing the European Atomic Energy Community.
Union harmonisation legislation — Any Union legislation harmonising the conditions for the marketing of products.
Union institution — The European Parliament, the European Council, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice of the European Union, the Court of Auditors, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, the European Ombudsman, the European Data Protection Supervisor or the European External Action Service (the ‘EEAS’); the European Central Bank shall not be considered to be a Union institution.
Union institutions and bodies — The Union institutions, bodies, offices and agencies set up by, or on the basis of, the TEU, the TFEU or the Euratom Treaty.
Union rail system — The elements listed in Annex I of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Union rail system — The Union rail system as defined in point (1) of Article 2 of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Unique identifier — A sequence of digits or letters, or both, unambiguously assigned to a record by a machine or person and which identifies that record as unique and distinct from all other records.
Unique OP ID — Code composed of country code and alphanumeric OP code.
UNISIG — Industry Consortium which contributes to the writing of the ERTMS specifications
UNISIG — UNIFE ETCS Working group
UNISIG — Union Industry of Signalling (working party within UNIFE): steering committee involved in the development and implementation of ERTMS
Unit — One or more grouped operations in an industrial establishment that can be defined and separated from others, e.g., storage units, (Un)loading Units, pipes networks, process units.
Unit — (a)  A ‘unit’ is the generic term used to name the rolling stock which is subject to the application of this TSI, and therefore subject to ‘EC’ verification. (b)  A Unit may be composed of several ‘vehicles’
Unit — The rolling stock, which is subject to the application of this TSI, and therefore subject to the “EC” verification procedure. Chapter 2 of LOC&PAS TSI and Chapter 2 of WAG TSI describe what a unit can consist of.
Unit — Generic term used to name the rolling stock. It is subject to the application of this TSI, and therefore subject to the EC verification procedure. A unit can consist of: - a ‘wagon’ that can be operated separately, featuring an individual frame mounted on its own set of wheels, or - a rake of permanently connected ‘elements’, those elements cannot be operated separately, or - ‘separate rail bogies connected to compatible road vehicle(s)’ the combination of which forms a rake of a rail compatible system.
Unit — Assembly of one or more railway vehicles.
Unit — Rolling stock which is subject to the application of this document. Note 1 to entry: A unit can be composed of several powered or unpowered vehicles, or cars.
Unit capacity used — Code to indicate to which extent the equipment is loaded or empty. (e.g. full, empty, LCL).
Unit costs — Costs per unit of a good/service (e.g. traffic volume).
Unit in operation — A unit is in operation when it is registered with ‘Valid’ registration code ‘00’, in the National Vehicle Register in accordance with Decision 2007/756/EC or in the European Vehicle Register in accordance with Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1614 and maintained in a safe state of running in accordance with Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/779.
Unit Load — A number of individual packages bonded, palletised or strapped together to form a single unit for more efficient handling by mechanical equipment.
Unit load — Palletised load or prepacked unit with a footprint conforming to pallet dimensions and suitable for loading into an ITU.
Unit train — A freight train dispatched with only one consignment note and only one type of goods and composed of uniform wagons running from a consignor to a consignee without intermediate marshalling.
Universal design — The design of products, environments, programmes and services to be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possible, without the need for adaptation or specialised design. ‘Universal design’ shall not exclude assistive devices for particular groups of persons with disabilities where this is needed.
Universal toilet — Is a toilet designed to be used by all passengers including all persons with disabilities and persons_with_reduced_mobility.
Unladen vehicle weight — It is weight of vehicle (or combination of vehicles) excluding its load when stationary and ready for the road. The unladen weight may include driver and fuel, dependent on national practice.
Unloader — Any enterprise which: (a) Removes a container, bulk-container, MEGC, tank-container, portable tank or road vehicle from a wagon; or (b) Unloads packaged dangerous goods, small containers or portable tanks out of or from a wagon or a container; or (c) Discharges dangerous goods from a tank (tank-wagon, demountable tank, portable tank or tank-container) or from a battery-wagon or MEGC or from a wagon, large container or small container for carriage in bulk or a bulk-container.
Unloader — An  enterprise  which  removes  a  container,  bulk-container,  multiple-element  gas  container,  tank- container or portable tank from a wagon, or any enterprise which unloads  packaged  goods,  small  containers  or portable tanks out of or from a wagon or a container, or any enterprise which discharges goods from a tank (tank-  wagon, demountable tank, portable tank or tank-container), or from  a  battery-wagon  or  multiple-element  gas container, or from a wagon, large container or small container for carriage in bulk or a bulk-container.
Unloading — All actions carried out by the unloader, in accordance with the definition of unloader.
Unprotected wrong side failure — A wrong side failure where no other part of the signalling system provides protection.
UNRRA — United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Agency
UNRWA — United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
Upgrade of the railway infrastructure — Major modification works to the infrastructure which improve its overall performance.
Upgraded high-speed railway line — A conventional line specially upgraded to allow traffic at speeds equal to or greater than 200 km/h for the main segments. They include specially upgraded high speed lines which have specific features as a result of topographical, relief or town- planning constraints, on which the speed must be adapted for each case.
Upgrading — Any major modification work on a subsystem or part of it which results in a change in the technical file accompanying the ‘EC’ declaration of verification, if that technical file exists, and which improves the overall performance of the subsystem (Article 2(14) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Upgrading — Is a major modification work of an existing infrastructure subsystem resulting in at least compliance with one additional traffic code or a change in the declared combination of traffic codes (referred to Table 2 and Table 3 in point 4.2.1).
Upgrading — Is a major modification work of an existing energy subsystem resulting in an increase of the line speed of more than 30km/h.
Upgrading — Any major modification work on a subsystem or part of it which results in a change in the technical file accompanying the ‘EC’ declaration of verification, if that technical file exists, and which improves the overall performance of the subsystem.
Upgrading — Any  major modification  work on  a subsystem  or part  of it which  results  in  a change in the technical file accompanying the ‘EC’ declaration of verification, if that technical file exists,  and which improves the overall performance of the subsystem (Article 2(14) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Upgrading — Any  major  modification  work  on  a  subsystem  or  part  of  it  which  results  in  a change in the technical file accompanying the ‘EC’ declaration of verification, if that  technical  file  exists,  and  which  improves  the  overall  performance  of  the subsystem (Article 2(14) of Directive (EU) 2016/797)
Upgrading — Any major modification work on a subsystem or part of it which results in a change to the technical file relating to the subsystem, if that technical file exists, and which improves the overall performance of the subsystem.
UPU — Universal Postal Union
URBAN — Initiative concerning urban areas
Urban and suburban rail passenger service — A rail passenger service within the meaning of point (6) of Article 3 of Directive 2012/34/EU.
Urban and suburban services — Transport services operated to meet the transport needs of an urban centre or conurbation, as well as the transport needs between such centre or conurbation and surrounding areas.
Urban and suburban services — Transport services whose principal purpose is to meet the transport needs of an urban centre or conurbation, including a cross-border conurbation, together with transport needs between such a centre or conurbation and surrounding areas.
Urban guided transport (UGT) — Railway system designed to provide urban and suburban transport services EXAMPLE:Metro, tram and light rail system (LRS)
Urban node — An urban area where elements of the transport infrastructure of the trans-European transport network for passengers and freight, such as ports, including passenger terminals, airports, railway stations, bus terminals and multimodal freight terminals, located in and around the urban area are connected with other elements of that infrastructure and with the infrastructure for regional and local traffic, including infrastructure for active modes.
Urban node — An ‘urban node’ as defined in Article 3, point (p), of Regulation (EU) No 1315/2013.
URL — Uniform resource locator
US — United States of America (the)
Usable length of a platform — The maximum continuous length of that part of platform in front of which a train is intended to remain stationary in normal operating conditions for passengers to board and alight from the train, making appropriate allowance for stopping tolerances. Normal operating conditions means that railway is operating in a non-degraded mode (e.g. rail adhesion is normal, signals are working, everything is working as planned).
Usable length of platform — The   maximum   continuous   length   (expressed in metres) of that part of platform in front of which a train is intended to remain stationary in normal operating conditions for passengers to board and alight from the train, making appropriate allowance for stopping tolerances.
Usable length of siding — Total length of the siding/stabling track expressed in metres where trains can be parked safely.
USAID — Agency for International Development (USA)
Use for statistical purposes — The exclusive use for the development and production of statistical results and analyses.
Use of eddy current brakes — Indication  of  limitations  on  the  use  of eddy current brakes.
Use of flange lubrication forbidden — Indication  whether  the  use  of  on-board device for flange lubrication is forbidden.
Use of hand portables as cab mobile radio — Requirements related to hand portables fulfilling cab radio functions. Indicate here if the 2 Watt hand portable can be used as an option or not and what are the related requirements, restrictions, etc., taking into account Section 7.3.3. ‘ERTMS - On-board implementation’ of Commission Decision 2012/88/EU (1).
Use of magnetic brakes — Indication  of  limitations  on  the  use  of magnetic brakes.
Use-charge — Any charge related directly to actual use of a transport mode; is a variable charge (as opposed to, say, vehicle and sales taxes, which are fixed charges). The term is preferred here because “user charge”, which is frequently employed in the literature in this sense, can be misinterpreted out of context.
User — Any individual who uses functionality provided by a CIS, whether inside or outside the Commission.
User — Any natural person using a network or terminal equipment operated under the control of a Union institution or body.
USR — User
UTC — Universal Time Co-ordinated
Utility — Benefit received by an individual through consumption of a good/service or through the existence of that good/service (private utility); or the aggregate of private utilities in an economy (social utility)
UTP — Uniform Technical Prescriptions
UY — Uruguay
UZ — Uzbekistan
v — Theoretical initial speed at the brake application initiation
v — Versus
V&V — Verification and Validation
VA — Holy See (the)
VA — Vulnerability within asset category
Vacuum valve — A spring-loaded device which is activated automatically by pressure the purpose of which is to protect the tank against unacceptable negative internal pressure.
Vacuum-operated waste tank — A tank-container or tank swap body primarily used for the carriage of dangerous wastes, with special constructional features and/or equipment to facilitate the filling and discharging of wastes as specified in Chapter 6.10. A tank which fully complies with the requirements of Chapter 6.7 or 6.8 is not considered to be a vacuum-operated waste tank.
Validation — Confirmation by examination and provision of objective evidence that the particular requirements for a specific intended use have been fulfilled.
Validation — The process of verifying and confirming that an electronic signature or a seal is valid.
Validation — Confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that the requirements for a specific intended use or application have been fulfilled.
Validation data — Data that is used to validate an electronic signature or an electronic seal.
Validation of non-formal and informal learning — The process of confirmation by a competent authority that an individual has acquired learning outcomes acquired in non-formal and informal learning settings measured against a relevant standard and consists of the following four distinct phases: identification through dialogue of particular experiences of an individual, documentation to make visible the individual’s experiences, a formal assessment of those experiences and certification of the results of the assessment which may lead to a partial or full qualification
Validator — The person or agent appointed to carry out validation.
Validity — The fact that a document has all the intrinsic and extrinsic characteristics required by its production context, necessary in order to be accepted as an expression of its author with all its legal consequences.
Valuation — Process of estimating the economic value of a certain quantity of a good/service; generally expressed in monetary terms.
Value — The value of a service, a route, a public service contract, or a compensation scheme for public passenger transport corresponding to the total remuneration, before VAT, of the public service operator or operators, including compensation of whatever kind paid by the public authorities and revenue from the sale of tickets which is not repaid to the competent authority in question.
Value (of a parameter) — Numeric quantity allocated to a parameter.
Van — Vehicle without traction capable of carrying payload other than passengers, e.g. luggage or mail, intended to be integrated into a fixed or variable formation which is intended to transport passengers
Vapour cloud explosion and flash fire — When a leakage occurs on an equipment item, a gaseous release can occur, either directly, or following the gradual vaporization of a pool on the ground close to the leakage. This event leads to the formation of a cloud that drifts and disperses with the wind. If the substance is flammable, there is an intermediate zone in which the vapour concentrations in the air are between the flammability limits of the substance. A sufficiently energetic ignition source, on the trajectory of the flammable zone of the cloud, may ignite this cloud. According to the front flame speed, the accident will lead to a flash fire or a VCE (vapour cloud explosion). The latter event causes an overpressure – underpressure wave. A devastating effect is associated with the peak overpressure as well as with the wave shape.
Variable — A set of bits which are given a unique identity and meaning.
VAT — Value-Added Tax
VAT — Value added tax
VAT (value-added tax) — An indirect tax, expressed as a percentage applied to the selling price of most goods and services. VAT is broadly harmonised in the European Union but Member States may fix their own rates of tax, within parameters set at EU level, and also enjoy a limited option to tax or not to tax certain goods and services.
VBC — Virtual Balise Cover
VC — Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
VCE — Vapour Cloud Explosion. An explosion that is the consequence of the combustion of a cloud of flammable vapour, gas or spray mixed with air, in which the flame speed is such that a significant overpressure occurs. Vulnerable entity or object under consideration.
VE — Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)
VE — Vulnerability within environmental category
Vehicle — A railway vehicle that runs on its own wheels on railway lines, with or without traction. A vehicle is composed of one or more structural and functional subsystems or parts of such subsystems.
Vehicle — A motor vehicle registered in the territory of a Contracting Party or a combination of vehicles of which at least the tractive unit is registered in the territory of a Contracting Party and intended exclusively for the carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle so constructed and equipped as to be suitable for carrying more than nine persons, including the driver, and intended for that purpose.
Vehicle — Defined in point (3) of Article 2 of Directive (EU) 2016/797, Article 2(c); considering the scope of this TSI, the use of the term ‘vehicle’ in this TSI is limited to the rolling stock subsystem as defined in Chapter 1.
Vehicle — A railway vehicle suitable for circulation on wheels on railway lines, with or without traction; a vehicle is composed of one or more structural and functional subsystems.
Vehicle — Any motor vehicle intended for use on the road, having at least four wheels and a maximum design speed exceeding 25 km/h, and any trailer, with the exception of vehicles which run on rails, mobile machinery and agricultural and forestry tractors that do not travel at a speed exceeding 40 km/h when transporting dangerous goods.
Vehicle — A railway vehicle suitable for circulation on wheels on railway lines with or without traction; a vehicle is composed of one or more structural and functional subsystems
Vehicle — A railway vehicle suitable to circulate on its own wheels on railway lines with or without traction; a vehicle is composed of one or more structural and functional subsystems.
Vehicle — A motor vehicle or a trailer carried on the occasion of the carriage of passengers.
Vehicle  impedance — Impedance   as   defined   in   the   specification   referenced   in Appendix  A-1,  index  [D]
Vehicle authorisation for placing on the market — The decision issued by the authorising entity based on a reasonable assurance that the applicant and the entities involved in the design, manufacture, verification and validation of the vehicle have fulfilled their respective obligations and responsibilities in order to ensure conformity with essential requirements of the applicable legislation or to ensure conformity with the authorised type enabling that the vehicle may be placed on the market and may be used safely in the area of use according to the conditions for use and other restrictions, when applicable, specified in the vehicle authorisation and in the vehicle type authorisation.
Vehicle body — Main load carrying structure supported by running gear. Note 1 to entry: It includes components which are affixed to this structure which contribute directly to its strength, stiffness and stability. Note 2 to entry: Mechanical equipment and other mounted parts are not considered to be part of the vehicle body though their attachments to it are. Note 3 to entry: The term “carbody” may be used instead of “vehicle body”.
Vehicle combination — Either: - a road train consisting of a motor vehicle coupled to a trailer; or -  an articulated vehicle consisting of a motor vehicle coupled to a semi-trailer.
Vehicle dynamics — Parameter without explanation in the document
Vehicle entrance impedance — Entrance impedance for the frequencies of the traction spectrum influencing the track circuits of the network, e.g. the entrance impedance at 50 Hz in the case of 50 Hz track circuits; entrance impedance to limit the inrush current, e.g. for DC track circuits.
Vehicle gauge — Refers to all requirements connected to vehicle gauge/vehicle profile. To announce the accepted kinematic vehicle gauge(s) including pantograph gauge.
Vehicle gauge — Vertical and lateral limits that no railway vehicle part may exceed.
Vehicle in operation — The vehicle is in operation when it is registered with ‘Valid’ registration code ‘00’, in the National Vehicle Register in accordance with Commission Decision 2007/756/EC (26) or in the European Vehicle Register in accordance with Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2018/1614 (27) and maintained in a safe state of running in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/779
Vehicle Keeper Marking (VKM) — Alphabetic code, consisting of 2 to 5 letters. A VKM is inscribed on each rail vehicle, near the European Vehicle Number. The VKM identifies the Vehicle Keeper as registered in a National Vehicle Register. A VKM is unique and valid in all Member States and all countries that enter into an agreement that involves the application of the system of vehicle numbering and VKM as set out in this Decision.
Vehicle marking — Vehicle marking refers to operational and technical information for railway staff, may be inside and outside the vehicle.
Vehicle structure — Parameter without explanation in the document
Vehicle type authorisation — The decision issued by the authorising entity based on reasonable assurance that the applicant and the entities involved in the design, manufacture, verification and validation of the vehicle type have fulfilled their obligations and responsibilities in order to ensure conformity with the essential requirements of the applicable legislation enabling that a vehicle manufactured according to this design may be placed on the market and may be used safely in the area of use of the vehicle type according to the conditions for use of the vehicle and other restrictions, when applicable, specified in the vehicle type authorisation and to be applied to all vehicle authorised in conformity to this type.
Vehicle type variant — An option for the configuration of a vehicle type that is established during a first authorisation of the vehicle type in accordance with Article 24(1) or changes within an existing vehicle type during its life cycle that require a new authorisation of the vehicle type in accordance with Articles 24(1) and 21(12) of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Vehicle type version — An option for the configuration of a vehicle type or type variant or changes within an existing type or type variant during its life cycle, created to reflect changes to the basic design characteristics that do not require a new authorisation of the vehicle type in accordance with Articles 24(1) and 21(12) of Directive (EU) 2016/797.
Vehicle-kilometre — One kilometre travelled by a single vehicle.
Vendor — An economic operator registered in a list of vendors to be invited to submit requests to participate in or submit tenders.
Verification — Confirmation, by examination and provision of objective evidence, that the specified requirements for the lifecycle phase have been fulfilled.
Verification — Confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that specified requirements have been fulfilled.
Verifier — The person or agent appointed to carry out verification.
Vertically integrated undertaking — An undertaking where, within the meaning of Council Regulation (EC) No 139/2004: (a) an infrastructure manager is controlled by an undertaking which at the same time controls one or several railway undertakings that operate rail services on the infrastructure manager's network; (b) an infrastructure manager is controlled by one or several railway undertakings that operate rail services on the infrastructure manager's network; or (c) one or several railway undertakings that operate rail services on the infrastructure manager's network are controlled by an infrastructure manager. It also means an undertaking consisting of distinct divisions, including an infrastructure manager and one or several divisions providing transport services that do not have a distinct legal personality. Where an infrastructure manager and a railway undertaking are fully independent of each other, but both are controlled directly by a Member State without an intermediary entity, they are not considered to constitute a vertically integrated undertaking for the purposes of this Directive.
Vertiport — An area used for the take-off and landing of vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft.
Very high capacity networks — Very high capacity networks as defined in Article 2, point (2), of Directive (EU) 2018/1972.
Vessel — Any inland waterway or seagoing vessel.
Vessel collapse — A vessel collapse is the complete failure of the equipment, due to a decrease of the internal pressure in the vessel leading to the collapse of the vessel under the effect of atmospheric pressure. This event leads to the complete and instantaneous release of the substance in the vessel. The vessel collapse does not lead to overpressure generation nor missiles ejection.
Vessel Traffic Monitoring and Information System’ or VTMIS — The ‘vessel traffic monitoring and information system’ established by Directive 2002/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (30).
VG — Virgin Islands (British)
VH — Vulnerability within human category
VHF — Very high frequency
VI — Virgin Islands (U.S.)
Viable alternative — Access to another service facility which is economically acceptable to the railway undertaking, and allows it to operate the freight or passenger service concerned.
Virtual balise cover — A specific marker in balise telegrams, that allows substituting the physical cover plates in lines under construction.
Visual acuity — Capacity for seeing distinctly fine details that have a very small angular separation.
Visual and audible vehicle identification and warning functions — Parameter without explanation in the document
Vital — A description applied to equipment whose correct operation is essential to the integrity of the signalling system. Most vital equipment is designed to fail-safe principles - a wrong side failure of vital equipment could directly endanger rail traffic.
VKM — Vehicle Keeper Marking
vkm — Vehicle-kilometre
VKMR — Vehicle Keeper Marking Register
VL — Abbreviation in B.5 for “berths” (Vagon Lit)
vm — Maximum service speed
VN — Viet Nam
VOCs — Volatile organic compounds
Voltage and frequency of overhead contact line power supply — Parameter without explanation in the document
Volunteer — A person working on a non-compulsory basis for an organisation without being paid.
VR — Abbreviation in B.5 for “Meal in restaurant car” (Voiture Restaurant)
VTA — Vehicle Type Authorisation
VU — Vanuatu
Vulnerability — Within this framework, a potential vulnerability is any part of the transport system or its environment which is sensitive to hazardous scenarios and may be damaged/ harmed by the resulting hazardous areas.
Vulnerability — A weakness, susceptibility or flaw of ICT products or ICT services that can be exploited by a cyber threat.
Vulnerable — Which can be harmed by (which is sensitive to) a given hazard.
VVR — Virtual Vehicle Register, as defined in Decision 2007/756/EC
V_NVALLOWOVTRP — Speed   limit   allowing   the   driver   to   select   the   “override” function  in  km/h According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
V_NVSUPOVTRP — Override  speed  limit  to  be  supervised  when  the  “override” function  is  active  in  km/h According  to  the  specification  referenced  in  Appendix  A-1, index  [C]
W — Warning supervision limit
W/(m2.°C) — Watt/square meter/°C
WAG — Freight Wagons (TSI)
Wagon — A railway vehicle, not provided with a means of traction, which is intended to carry goods (see also battery-wagon, closed wagon, open wagon, sheeted wagon and tank-wagon).
Wagon — Any rail vehicle without its own means of propulsion that runs on its own wheels on railway tracks and is used for the carriage of goods.
Wagon — A railway vehicle, not provided with a means of traction, which is intended to carry goods
Wagon — Railway vehicle for carrying freight.
Wagon (WAG) TSI — Commission Regulation (EU) No 321/2013 of 13 March 2013 concerning the technical specification for interoperability relating to the subsystem ‘rolling stock - freight wagons’ of the rail system in the European Union and repealing Decision 2006/861/EC
Wagon Compatibility Code (WCC) — The WCC is a letter indicating, for an ILU, which the freight wagon is compatible and, respectively, for a freight wagon, which ILU is compatible (e.g. C, P). The WCC is also used in the combined transport profile of a section of line.
Wagon Correction Digit (WCD) — The WCD is a relative number reflecting the characteristics of  a given wagon compared to a reference wagon; this number is subtracted from the technical number of the ILU.
Wagon Correction Digit (WCD) — Is the result of a comparison between the geometric characteristics of the unit under assessment and the characteristics of the reference wagons defined in point H.3.
Wagon for intermodal transport — See RAIL WAGON FOR INTERMODAL TRANSPORT Sometimes also referred to as intermodal car.
Wagon in running order (operating term) — Wagon that is in running order on its own wheels in freight trains under normal operating conditions,  where appropriate at the end of a train, without representing a hazard for operations
Wagon keeper — The person or entity that, being the owner of a wagon or having the right to use it, exploits the wagon as a means of transport and is registered as keeper of the wagon in the competent official vehicle register, or, if the wagon is not registered in the competent official vehicle register or such a register is not existing, the person or entity that has declared to the GCU Bureau to be keeper of the wagon.
Wagon load — A unit load whereas the unit is a wagon.
Wagon Note — Forwarding and deployment document accompanying a wagon making an empty run (see specimen in  Appendix 3
Wagon Tare — Total mass of the unloaded wagon, expressed in kilograms and marked on each side of the wagon (for  marking rules, see Appendix 11). The marked tare must not differ from the actual observed mass of the  wagon by more than 100 kilograms (heavier/lighter) per wheelset on the wagon.
Wagon-kilometre — Unit of measurement representing any movement of a wagon loaded or empty over a distance of one kilometre. The distance to be considered is that actually travelled (each country counts the km performed on its territory). Shunting and other similar movements are excluded. All wagon journeys are included irrespective of the ownership of the wagon.
Waiting Area — A place to wait for the departure of the train having all the following characteristics:   - Seats are available  - Information about the departures of the trains is available  - People are protected against weather influences (i.e. rain, sun, wind)
Warning — Audible and/or visual indication to alert the driver to a condition which requires a positive action by the driver.
Warning sign — Safety sign that indicates a specific source of potential harm.
Waste water disposal systems — Requirements concerning waste water disposal system, including interface to toilet discharge system. Usually definition of evacuation nozzle and the flushing connection for the toilet tank. Excluded: toilet emissions (see parameter 6.2.1.1 - Toilet emissions).
Wastes — Substances, solutions, mixtures or articles for which no direct use is envisaged but which are carried for reprocessing, dumping, elimination by incineration or other methods of disposal.
Water supply system — Conformity to sanitary regulations regarding drinking water supply. Usually ensured by specifications of piping and sealing material and quality. Specification of filling adapters (interoperability constituents).
Waterway — It is a river, canal, lake or other stretch of water, that is not part of the sea, which through natural or man-made features is suitable for navigation. This term includes both navigable rivers and lakes and navigable canals. The length of rivers and canals is measured in mid-channel. The length of lakes and lagoons is measured along the shortest navigable route between the two most distant points that perform transport operations. A waterway forming a common frontier between two countries is reported by both states. Waterways also include river estuaries, the boundary with the sea being that point nearest the sea where the width of the river is both less than 3 kilometres (km) at low water and less then 5 km at high water.
Waterway of maritime character — See navigable inland waterway
Waybill — The document made out by the carrier or on behalf of the carrier evidencing the contract for the transport of cargo.
WCPFC — Commission for the Conservation and Management of Highly Migratory Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (usual name: Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission)
WECAFC — Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission
Weekly noise exposure level (LEX,8h) — Time-weighted average of the daily noise exposure levels for a nominal week of five eight-hour working days as defined by international standard ISO 1999:1990, point 3.6 (note 2).
Weigh in motion system — An automatic system set up on the road infrastructure with the objective of identifying vehicles or vehicle combinations in circulation that are likely to have exceeded the relevant weight limits, in accordance with Directive 96/53/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council (43).
Weight — The quantity of goods in tonnes (1 000 kilograms). The weight to be taken into consideration includes, in addition to the weight of the goods transported, the weight of packaging and the tare weight of containers, swap bodies, pallets as well as road vehicles transported by rail in the course of combined transport operations. If the goods are transported using the services of more than one railway undertaking, when possible the weight of goods shall not be counted more than once.
WEU — Western European Union
WF — Wallis and Futuna
WFTU — World Federation of Trade Unions
WG — Working Group
Wheel — Requirements on the wheel (e.g. strength, strength calculation, material, manufacturing method, inner mechanical tension state, surface roughness, surface protection/paint coat, marking, ability for non-destructive testing). In case of tyred wheels: requirements on wheel tyre, joining and fixing on wheel body, marking. For wheel profile and limits see 3.2.3. ( Wheel profile and limits)
Wheel pair — Two rail wheels located at the same longitudinal position.
Wheel profile and limits — Requirements for wheel profiles in relation to the relevant track system(s); to announce accepted wheel profiles (e.g. S1002 is widely accepted).
Wheel slide protection (WSP) — Is a system designed to use the maximum available adhesion by decreasing, holding or increasing the brake force to prevent wheel sets from locking and uncontrolled sliding. Thereby the stopping distance shall be optimised.
Wheel Slide Protection (WSP) system — A wheel slide protection system (WSP) is a system designed to make the best use of available adhesion by a controlled reduction and restoration of the brake force to prevent wheelsets from locking and uncontrolled sliding, thereby minimising the extension of stopping distances and possible wheel damage.
Wheel slide protection system (WSP) — Requirements concerning the wheel slide protection (WSP) system, e.g. for which vehicles/vehicle configurations a WSP system is mandatory, requirements on the WSP system performance, safety relevance.
Wheel tread temperature — Average temperature out of three values measured by three rubbing thermocouples spaced equally across the wheel tread.
Wheel/rail interaction influencing systems — Requirements to all vehicle mounted systems which have influence to the wheel/rail interaction such as wheel flange lubrication, upper sway/wearing track wheel interactions, requirements deriving from traction, braking, except for sanding system. Compatibility with CCS trackside equipment is covered for EMC by parameter 8.4.2 and for other compatibility requirements by parameters 12.2.4 (Compatibility of rolling stock with CCS Trackside).
Wheelset — Assembly of a wheel pair and an axle. Note 1 to entry: A conventional wheelset has wheels forced to rotate at the same speed by the connecting axle. Note 2 to entry: Axle-mounted or wheel-mounted brake disks and bearings are typically regarded as part of a wheelset.
Wheelset (complete) — Requirements on joining of the components (axle shaft, wheels, bearings, axle boxes, traction components…), tolerances, impedance between wheels. Not included: requirements on strength and strength calculation of axle shaft, wheels, bearings, traction components and on ability for non-destructive testing.
Wheelslide — When a braked wheel loses adhesion with the rails and under rotates.
Wheelslip — When a traction-driven wheel loses adhesion with the rails and over rotates
WHO — World Health Organization (UN)
Windows — Requirements concerning windows (windows to the outside of a vehicle), e.g. mechanical characteristics. Items excluded: - windscreen in the cab see parameter 9.1.3  (Windscreen in driver's cab); - windows inside the vehicle; - fire safety, evacuation and emergency exits (see parameters 10.2.1 - Passenger evacuation concept).
Windscreen in driver's cab — Parameter without explanation in the document
WIPO — World Intellectual Property Organization (UN)
Withdrawal — Any measure aimed at preventing a product in the supply chain from being made available on the market.
Withdrawal — Any measure aimed at preventing radio equipment in the supply chain from being made available on the market.
Withdrawal of a path request — Recall of a path request by the applicant(s) before the final timetable is delivered.
WK — Wagon Keepers
Wooden barrel — A packaging made of natural wood, of round cross-section, having convex walls, consisting of staves and heads and fitted with hoops.
Wooden IBC — A rigid or collapsible wooden body, together with an inner liner (but no inner packaging) and appropriate service and structural equipment.
Work — The outcome of building or civil engineering works taken as a whole that is sufficient in itself to fulfil an economic or technical function.
Working days — All days other than public holidays, Sundays and Saturdays.
Working Group (WG) — Basic EIM unit in which experts from EIM’s member organisations work on technical aspects of the rail system. WGs report to the TSG and advise EIM’s deciding bodies on technical issues. Most EIM Working Groups second speakers to the Agency Work Groups.
Working Party (WP) — A significant part of the ERA’s workgroups are called “Working Parties”. Working Parties are dedicated to the drafting of specific TSIs, CSMs, CSI, CST etc. with experts from rail stakeholder organisations.
Working pressure — (a) For a compressed gas meands the settled pressure  at a reference temperature of 15 °C in a full pressure receptacle; (b) For UN 1001 acetylene, dissolved, means the calculated settled pressure at a uniform reference temperature of 15 °C in an acetylene cylinder containing the specified solvent content and the maximum acetylene content; (c) For UNI 3374 acetylene, solven free, means the working pressure which was calculated for the equivalent clinder for UN 1001 acetylene, dissolved. NOTE: For tanks, see "Maximum working pressure(gauge pressure)".
Working range of pantographs — Parameter without explanation in the document
Working time — Any period during which the worker is at work, at the employer's disposal and carrying out his or her activities or duties, in accordance with national laws and/or practice.
Working time — Any period during which the worker is working, at the employer's disposal and carrying out his activity or duties, in accordance with national laws and/or practice.
Working timetable — The data defining all planned train and rolling-stock movements which will take place on the relevant infrastructure during the period for which it is in force.
Working week — A conventional representation used to indicate in which days of a week a service is present or not, as an alternative to the generic method of the “days of operation” (see). The days from Monday to Sunday are indicated with the digits 1 to 7, and only the digits corresponding to the days when the service is present are listed)
Works — The purchase, supply and deployment of components, systems and services including software, the carrying-out of development and construction and installation activities relating to a project, the acceptance of installations and the launching of a project.
Works contract — A contract covering either: (a) the execution or both the execution and design of a work; (b) the execution or both the execution and design of a work related to one of the activities referred to in Annex II to Directive 2014/24/EU; or (c) the realisation, by whatever means, of a work corresponding to the requirements specified by the contracting authority exercising a decisive influence on the type or design of the work.
Woven plastics — (For flexible IBCs) means a material made from stretch tapes or monofilaments of suitable plastics material.
WP — Working Party
Wrong side failure — An equipment failure tending to cause danger to rail traffic.
Wrong side signalling failure — Any technical failure of a signalling system (either to infrastructure or to rolling stock), resulting in signalling information less restrictive than that demanded.
WS — Samoa
WSF — Wrong Side Failure
WSP — Wheel Slide Protection (WSP) system
WTG — Watergate waters area (Inland waterways)
WTO — World Trade Organization (successor to GATT)
WTT — Well-to-tank
WTW — Well-to-wheel
WWF — Worldwide Fund for Nature (formerly World Wildlife Fund)
XML — Extended Mark-up Language
XML — Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language that defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable. It is defined in the XML 1.0 Specification produced by the W3C, and several other related specifications all gratis open standards
XML — ExXtensible Markup Language (XML) is a markup language that defines a set of rules for encoding documents in a format that is both human-readable and machine-readable. It is defined in the XML 1.0 Specification produced by the W3C, and several other related specifications all gratis open standards
XQL — Extended Structured Query Language
XSD — XML Schema Document-a document written in the XML Schema language, typically containing the "xsd" XML namespace prefix and stored with the ".xsd" filename extension
Y — Year
YE — Yemen
YT — Mayotte
ZA — South Africa
Zero-emission vehicle — A zero-emission heavy-duty vehicle as defined in point (11) of Article 3 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1242 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ZM — Zambia
ZW — Zimbabwe
Θ0 — Initial temperature of the wheel tread at the beginning of the brake application
μa — Instantaneous friction coefficient determined at every instance of the braking by the ratio between the total brake force FtR and the total application force Fb
μm — Friction coefficient determined from reaching 95 % of the nominal application force FB of the instantaneous friction coefficient μa for the stopping distance s2
