---
title: "Glossary"
sourceName: "Official site of RISSB (Rail industry safety and standards board)"
sourceUrl: "https://www.rissb.com.au/glossary/"
regions:
  - "AU"
lastUpdated: "2025-07-06"
collectedBy: "A. Piatrou"
---

'A' arm — (Regional, AU) This is the top arm in semaphore or colour light speed signalling. Used for speed signalling in Victoria and South Australia.
'A' Light — (Regional, AU) An indication in the form of a letter 'A' mounted on a running signal which when displayed instructs the driver to treat the running signal as an automatic (permissive) signal. Used in New South Wales, Victoria and New Zealand.
(EMC) —  Abbreviation for 'electromagnetic compatibility'.
(signal) —  Abbreviation for 'electromagnetic compatibility'.
2 Aspect Block — (Legacy) Also known as a 'latch' in electronic systems.
2 Position Signalling — (Legacy) An automatic block system in which the signals can display two indications: 1) Next block section occupied. 2) Next block section clear.
2 Position Signalling — (Legacy) Two systems of signalling are in use in Victoria, namely two position and three position. In two position signalling a separate arm (usually on a separate post) is used to display the distant indication; and also a separate arm is provided for each possible route past that particular signal location towards the next fixed signal location. Two position signalling is therefore essentially a system of route indications and each arm applies only up to the next signal.
3 Aspect Block — (Legacy) An automatic block system in which the signals can display three indications: 1) Next block section occupied. 2) Next block section clear. 3) Not less than two block sections ahead are clear.
3 Position Signalling — (Legacy) Two systems of signalling are in use in Victoria, namely two position and three position. In three position signalling one arm or light unit may give both the home and the distant indications, and a combination of two arms on the one post may apply to any number of routes past that location. Three position signalling is therefore a system giving indications for speed control of trains and does not necessarily indicate the route to which the signal aspect applies.
4 Aspect Block — (Regional, AU) An automatic block system in which the signals can display four indications: 1) Next block section occupied. 2) Next block section clear. 3) Next two block sections clear. 4) Not less than three block sections ahead are clear.
5-pack — (Regional, AU) An articulated wagon comprising five platforms, the adjacent ends of individual units being supported on a common bogie and permanently connected by a device which permits free rotation in all planes. Example: 5-pack articulated wagon. Note, these do not always consist of five units; they could be 2-packs, 3-packs etc.
5-unit — (Regional, AU) A wagon consisting of five permanently coupled platforms, each platform independently supported on a pair of bogies. Example: 5-unit bogie well wagon. Note, 5-units are the most common but they do not need to consist of five units, i.e. there could be 2-units, 3-units etc in the same configuration.
AAR — (Overseas) Abbreviation for 'Association of American Railroads'.
Absolute Block — A system of train operation that prevents more than one train being in the block section at any one time.
Absolute Permissive Block — (Regional, AU) US concept - (was/is used in South Australia). Absolute in direction, permits following moves through section (where intermediate signals are provided).
Absolute Signal — A signal that must not be passed at stop without the authority of the Network Control Officer.
Absolute Signal Blocking (ASB) — A method used by Competent Workers to carry out work on track using controlled absolute signals set and kept at STOP, without a formally issued Work on Track Authority.
AC Immune — A signalling EMC term used to describe products or systems that provide a degree of immunity to Electromagnetic Interference from AC electric traction infrastructure or other electrical distribution systems.
AC Relay — A type of relay which is operated by an alternating current. One type of AC relay is an AC vane relay.
AC Track Circuit — A track circuit with a 50 Hertz alternating current track feed.
AC/DC Track Circuit — A DC track circuit with a rectified alternating current track feed.
Accept Lever — (Regional, AU) The lever or control device that is operated in order to accept a train towards the signaler's interlocking from the adjacent interlocking or section.
Accept Signal — A controlled signal fitted with a designation plate inscribed 'ACCEPT', or fitted with an interlocking name plate inscribed with the name of the controlling signal box. An accept signal is provided at the entrance to an interlocking which is at the exit end of a double line automatic section. The signal is used by the signaller to control the approach of trains from an area outside of the signaller's control to the controlled signal next ahead.
Accept/home Signal — The signal directly protects points, level crossings or other risks and allows the signaller to control the approach of trains from an area outside of the signaller's control to the controlled signal next ahead. A controlled signal provided in place of an accept signal at some interlockings which are located at the exit end of a double line automatic section.
Acceptance — A block signalling term where a train is permitted to proceed towards the 'accepting' signal box. Block regulations provide for circumstances under which a signaller may accept a train.
Access — 1. A designated safe way into, along, across or out of a rail corridor; or 2. A right to the provision of railway services by an industry participant.
Access Agreement — A formal agreement between a train operator and Rail Infrastructure Manager allowing the train operator to operate on the Rail Infrastructure Managers network under agreed commercial, technical and operational conditions.
Access Device — (Other) This includes ramps, steps, stairs, ladders and guardrails.
Access Lighting — Lighting of access equipment e.g. ladders and steps.
Access Manager — Wellway, corridor, aliseway, etc.
Access Path — A maintained road or unformed road that provides access to, and within, the rail corridor.
Access road — An organisation that has an agreement with a Rail Infrastructure Manager (RIM) to enter and use a rail Network.
Access User — Rail Infrastructure Manager (RIM) to enter and use a rail Network.
Accessibility — Requirements to provide equivalent access to people with disabilities which are defined in the DSFAPT for passenger rolling stock.
Accessible Information — Accessible information: Information that is provided in alternative formats (such as Braille, audible information, raised text signs, hearing augmentation) for people with hearing or vision impairment, intellectual or cognitive impairment.
Accident — An uncontrolled, unplanned, undesired event that results in loss to people, property and process or has an adverse impact on the environment. The principle outcome of an accident is that it will always result in loss.
Accommodating Crank — A two-arm crank with vertical axis, one arm of which is curved to facilitate connection.
Accreditation — The formal means of establishing the rail safety standards and practices for each railway covered by the Rail Safety Acts. Rail Infrastructure Managers and train operators need to be accredited before owning and/or operating a railway.
Accreditation Authority — An authority of the State or Territory authorised to grant rail safety accreditation to Rail Transport Operators consistent with Rail Safety National Law 2012.
ACOP —  Australian Code of Practice.
Acoustic Detector — Line side system used to detect suspected defective axle bearings by sound wave signature.
Active Control Level Crossing — Track crossing incorporating physical barriers, warning signs, line marking, lights and audible devices to alert vehicular or pedestrian traffic that a train is approaching or crossing. Examples include gates, booms, flashing lights, bells and sirens.
Active Suspension System — A positive feedback system for rail guidance wheels which ensures that they maintain constant contact with the rail to give continuous guidance.
Actuation Device — A device in a deadman system which requires continuous control input from the driver, typically via pressing or grasping by feet or hands. Also known as 'operator enable device or Drivers Safety Contol'.
Adaptor Coupling —  A coupling that enables two railway vehicles with dissimilar coupling systems to be coupled together.
ADG — Abbreviation for 'Australian dangerous goods code'.
Adjacent — Near to, close to.
Adjoining — In contact with, connected to.
Adjustable Crank — A right-angle crank, one arm of which is provided with means for varying its effective length.
ADR —  Abbreviation for 'Australian design rules' applied to motor vehicles.
Advance —  A position along the line ahead of a given position, when facing the direction a train travels on the line. The area through which a train travels after passing a given position.
Advanced Starting Signal — In block signalling, a stop signal beyond the starting signal, and worked from the same signal box. Also an alternative term for Section Signal. A signal beyond the points controlling the entry into the section.
Advanced Train Control System (ATCS) — (Overseas) An incomplete American development for advanced signalling and train control systems founded on a standard specification for a digital data communications network including a train-based communications platform. ATCS specifications would incorporate transmission based positive train separation as well as non-signalling features such as locomotive health monitoring.
Advanced Train Management System (ATMS) — To give written or electronic notice, usually in advance, of planned activities.
Advertise — A distinctive speed board indicating to drivers to reduce the speed of the train so that the train is not travelling in excess of the speed shown on the board before passing the next signal ahead. However, as soon as the driver observes that the next signal ahead is displaying a full clear indication, normal track speed for that indication may be resumed. The driver does not allow the train to exceed any other lower temporary or permanent track or train speed restrictions, irrespective of the speed indicated by the advisory speed board.
Aerial Cable — A multi-conductor cable, designed for erection on an overhead line wire route.
AF Track Circuit — Audio Frequency track circuits consist of a transmitter which transmits a modulated audio frequency signal along the track to a receiver, which operates at the same frequency at the other end of the track circuit. The receiver will only respond to a signal with the correct frequency, modulation and/or code.
Affected Signal — A signal not available for normal use.
Air Brake — A braking system activated by change in air pressure.
Air Horn — A device used to give warning.
ALARP —  Abbreviation for 'as low as reasonably practicable'.
Alignment Control Coupler —  Alignment of track, referred to as horizontal or vertical alignment. Horizontal alignment is the design horizontal alignment of track (i.e. straights, curves, etc.), vertical alignment is the design vertical alignment of track (gradients and vertical curves).
Alignment Control Coupler — Coupler where the rotation from the centre position is limited in order to reduce the sideways derailing force during buff conditions in train operation.
All Signals On — (Regional, AU) A signaller's control device that places or maintains all signals in a designated area to Danger.
Allocated Space — (Regional, AU) A three-dimensional space that can accommodate a wheelchair or similar mobility aid.
Alphanumeric Route Indicator — (Regional, AU) A route indicator that conveys its information by illuminated alphanumeric characters. The indicators are designated Standard and 'miniature' as a reference to the readability categorisation of the indications.
ALRP — (Regional, AU) Related Term: As low as reasonably practical. Refer to: SFAIRP.
Alternate Proceed Authority (APA) — An APA may be used to authorise rail traffic movements when the Proceed Authority normally provided by the system of Safeworking is not available.
Alternating Current Track Circuit — Track circuit fed with alternating current.
Aluminothermic Weld — A welding process used to join rails together. An aluminothermic reaction takes place within a crucible and the resultant metal flows into a mould enclosing the rail ends that are to be joined.
Anchor Block — The group of sleepers, with rail anchors or resilient fastenings, at each end of a module of track to be desrressed. The anchor block is used for restraining the longitudinal movement of the rail when it is tensed.
Anchor Point — A means of providing restraint to contraction, expansion and creep of rail.
Angle (crossing) — Crossings may be designated by a number which refers to the cotangent of the splay angle or rate of slope (commonly referred as 'angle').
Annett Key/lock — (Regional, AU) A locking mechanism for releasing a ground frame. The key to unlock the ground frame is held captive in an annett's instrument or lock which can be released remotely from the signal box and interlocked with the signalling.
Annunciator — (Regional, AU) An audible indicator, for example a bell or buzzer in a signal box or gate box.
ANRP — Australian Network Rules and Procedures.
Anti Climb Device — A device fitted at vehicle ends that engages with the same device on an adjacent vehicle in a collision to resist one vehicle over-riding the adjacent vehicle.
APA — Related Term: Alternate Proceed Authority (APA). Refer to: Alternate Proceed Authority (APA).
API —  American Petroleum Institute.
Apparatus refers to the signalling equipment system as a whole or as separate items of signalling control and operating equipment, signalling materials, and structures housing signalling equipment — (Regional, AU) Apparatus refers to the signalling equipment system as a whole or as separate items of signalling control and operating equipment, signalling materials, and structures housing signalling equipment.
Apparatus Case (or Cupboard) — (Regional, AU) A housing which is intended for unprotected outdoor use. It is usually of metal construction (or wooden if a cupboard), smaller than a building or REB and usually capable of being transported as a made-up unit.
Apparatus Function Test — (Regional, AU) Generally refers to function tests of an item of installed equipment, particularly trackside apparatus when set to work from the local controls.
Application Logic — (Regional, AU) Any technology based method that configures a product so as to provide site-specific command and control instructions. This includes mechanical logic, electro-mechanical logic, electronic switching or code.
Applied Cant — On curves in main line track it is usual to incline the track such that the outer rail in the curve is higher than the inside rail. The amount of inclination applied to the track is defined by the difference in height between the inner and outer rail, and this height difference is the Cant of the curve, often referred to the Applied Cant. The purpose of the applied cant is to allow train to negotiate the curve at higher speeds whilst reducing the risk of rollover and reducing discomfort to passengers. In a similar fashion to a motorcyclist leaning into a curve, the inward applied cant of the track counteracts the outward centrifugal force on the train. The amount of applied cant to the track is a compromise. A train travelling at the permitted line speed would benefit from a higher amount of applied cant to counteract its higher centrifugal force as a result of its higher speed. However, a train that is slow moving, or even stopped, on the curve requires little applied cant. Therefore, the amount of applied cant on a curve is usually between these two requirements.
Approach Clearing — A term used in connection with the clearing of a signal upon the approach of a train.
Approach Control — (Regional, AU) The restriction of the aspect of a signal, to ensure that the driver can comply with the turnout speed, or to control the speed of a train for a warning call-on, shunt or POSA class route.
Approach Lighting — (Regional, AU) A method of illuminating signal lights upon the approach of a train.
Approach Locking — (Regional, AU) Approach locking is track locking applied to prevent the alteration of points interlocked by a route, or the setting of an opposing route, once the signal for the route has been cleared and an approaching train has received an indication that the signal has been cleared.
Approach Release — (Regional, AU) An alternative term for Approach Control.
Approach To — (Regional, AU) In relation to equipment on or alongside the track, positioned such that a train passes the point before reaching another defined item of equipment. Also known as Bear.
Appropriate Authority — A generic term used to describe authorities e.g. Work Authority, Alternative Proceed Authority, etc.
Approved Document — A train control diagram, train register book or any other document for recording train or track machine movements over a section of railway.
Approved Employee — A qualified employee who has delegated authority approved and published by the commission.
APTA — (Overseas) Abbreviated term for 'American Public Transportation Association'.
ARA — Abbreviated term for 'Australasian Railway Association'.
Area Of Conflict — (Regional, AU) A section of line beyond the signal at danger on which a head-on, crossing or same direction converging collision with another legitimately positioned train could occur in the event of a SPAD.
Area Of Control — (Regional, AU) The extent of track subject to the control of a single signaller. Includes any automatic signalling supervised by the signaller.
AREMA — (Overseas) Abbreviated term for 'American Railway Engineering and Maintenance of Way Association'.
ARL —  Abbreviated term for 'Above Rail Level', as used in dimensions for height measured from top of rails, perpendicular to the plane of the rails.
Armature Contact — (Regional, AU) The moving contact piece of a relay that connects to, and moves in unison with, the relay armature.
ARO — (Legacy) Abbreviation for Accredited Rail Organisation.
Arrival Train Examination —  Either roll by or after placement examination is to be conducted by examining staff on arrival at the train destination.
ARS — Abbreviated term for 'automatic route setting'.
ARSC — Abbreviated term for the 'Acts, regulations, standards and codes of practice' applicable to those systems involved in an incident.
ARTC — Abbreviated term for 'Australian Rail Track Corporation'.
Articulated Connector — Connects two adjacent rolling stock bodies allowing them to angle with respect to each other and the whole assembly is supported by a single bogie.
Articulated Platform — The individual end and intermediate units of an articulated flat or well wagon.
Articulated Wagon — A wagon comprising two or more units, the adjacent ends of individual units being supported on a common bogie and permanently connected by a device that permits free rotation in all planes.
As Rolled Rail — Rail that is cooled off the mill without accelerated cooling, and is not subsequently heat treated.
ASB — Abbreviated term for 'Absolute Signal Blocking', a method used by track workers to carry out work on track using controlled absolute signals set and kept at stop, without a formally issued work on track authority.
Aspect — The displayed pattern or position of lights or arms used to give a signal indication.
Aspect Level — (Regional, AU) The level of interlocking required to be satisfied before a signal can display a proceed aspect.
Aspect Sequence — (Regional, AU) The order of the displayed aspects to give the driver information about the aspect of the signal or signals ahead.
Aspect Sequence Chart — (Regional, AU) A diagram, used during testing, showing the sequence of the aspects displayed at successive signals.
Assisting Locomotive — (Legacy) A crewed locomotive other than the main locomotive on a train.
Asymmetric Point Switch — A design of switch in which the switch rail cross section is asymmetric about its vertical axis and the height of the switch rail is approximately 2/3 the height of the stockrail. Points with asymmetric switches are also tangential.
At Grade Crossing — A crossing of a track by a roadway or pedestrian crossing at the same elevation. Also known as 'grade crossing'.
ATCS —  Advanced Train Control System.
ATMS — Related Term: Advanced Train Management System (ATMS). Refer to: Advanced Train Management System (ATMS).
ATO — Abbreviated term for 'automatic train operation'. Automatic Train Operation (ATO).
ATP — Abbreviated term for 'Automatic Train Protection', a system that supervises train speed and target speed, alerts driver of the braking equipment, and enforces braking when necessary.
ATR — (Regional, AU) Automatic Train Reporting.
ATSB — Abbreviated term for 'Australian Transport Safety Bureau'. Australian Transport Safety Bureau.
Attainable Speed — Automatic Train Reporting (ATR). The maximum speed a train is able to achieve at the location.
Attended Block Location — A block location at which an authorised worker is on duty for the working of trains. Also know as Attended Location.
Attended Location — A signalling location or block location that is switched in and controlled by a Competent Worker either on-site or at a remote location.
Audible Track Warning Signals — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Railway Track Signal. Refer to: Railway Track Signal.
Audible Warning Device — A device, such as a whistle, siren, horn or hooter, used to give warning.
Australian Code Of Practice (ACOP) — The Standards, Codes, Guidelines and Rules developed for the Austarlian rail industry.
Australian Network Rules And Procedures (ANRP) — The master set of rules and procedures that define how Rail Infrastructure Rail Infrastructure Managers and Rail Transport train Operators operate safely on the Australian Rail Network.
Australian Rail Safety Standards (AS4292) — (Legacy) The principles and standards prepared, approved and published by the Standards Association of Australia relating to railway safety management. An Australian Standard no longer supported and superseded by Rail Safety National Law.
Australian Transport Safety Bureau — The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) is Australia's national transport safety investigator. The ATSB's function is to improve safety and public confidence in the aviation, marine and rail modes of transport. The ATSB is Australia's prime agency for the independent investigation of civil aviation, rail and maritime accidents, incidents and safety deficiencies.
Authorise — To give formal written, spoken or signalled authority for an action.
Authorised Speed — The maximum speed as determined by the Rail Infrastructure Manager, subject to any lesser speed shown in a special train notice, authorised electronic management system or imposed by warning and caution boards or a permanent speed board.
Automatic Block — (Regional, AU) System of sectional division in which the section signals are operated automatically by means of apparatus worked directly by the occupation or clearing of the section by a train.
Automatic Control — (Regional, AU) Control which itself carries out the operations according to pre-determined conditions.
Automatic Coupler — A fitting on the end of rolling stock that engages with a compatible fitting on adjacent rolling stock by the action of propelling the vehicles together.
Automatic Function — (Regional, AU) A function that, under ordinary operation, is operated automatically by the passage of trains and is not interlocked with any other signalling function.
Automatic Level Crossing — (Regional, AU) A level crossing equipped with flashing lights, audible warning devices and, sometimes, half boom barriers, which are normally controlled entirely by the approach of a train and not normally interlocked with the signals.
Automatic Normalisation Of Points — Points which are automatically operated to the normal position when the route is normalised after the passage of a train.
Automatic Reclearing — (Regional, AU) Automatic reclearing, when initiated by the signaler, enables a controlled running signal route which has already been set, to operate in the same manner as automatic signals and thus avoid the need for the signaler to 'restroke' the signal to clear it again after the passage of a train. This feature is not generally provided if there is risk of wrong road movements occurring.
Automatic Route Normalisation — (Regional, AU) The automatic normalising of signal routes after a train passes the signal.
Automatic Route Setting (ARS) — (Regional, AU) A system which is used in conjunction with an interlocking system to automatically operate signals and points for the passage of trains. Signal routes over facing points are set automatically for trains based on information derived from timetables, train describers and/or a priority based algorithm.
Automatic Signal — (Regional, AU) A signal that is normally controlled exclusively by the operation of track-circuits, or more precisely it is a signal which is controlled by the passage of trains and automatically gives an indication of the condition - occupied or clear - of the section or sections in its control.
Automatic Switch Box — (Regional, AU) Equipment associated with a staff instrument at an unattended station in an electric train staff section. The automatic switch box enables an electric train staff for the section to be withdrawn from the staff instrument at the opposite end of the section, provided the staff instruments are in phase, as they would be if there is no other staff already withdrawn.
Automatic Tensioning (auto Tensioning) — The main conductors, catenary and contact wire/s of the overhead line equipment are pulled to a required tension. Where tension is kept constant by means of weights, springs, or hydraulic units, the equipment is said to be 'automatically tensioned'.
Automatic Track Warning System (ATWS) — A system that gives trackside staff audible and/or visible warning of the approach of trains independently of the signalling system.
Automatic Train Control (ATC) — (Regional, AU) Used to describe on-board automation that contributes to or replaces the driver's judgement as to how to control the train. (ATC=ATO+ATP).
Automatic Train Operation (ATO) — (Regional, AU) A high reliability system that automatically operates the train's driving controls in accordance with information usually received from the trackside signalling equipment or traffic control system.
Automatic Train Protection (ATP) — A system that supervises train speed and target speed, alerts driver of the braking equipment, and enforces braking when necessary. The system may be intermittent, semi-continuous or continuous according to its track-to-train transmission updating characteristics.
Automatic Train Reporting (ATR) — (Regional, AU) The automatic reporting of the running of individual trains which is compared against the timetable. The information is usually derived from computer based train describer systems and the train's identity is recorded at the time it passes nominated signals, or over nominated track circuits, or over track transponders, or is entered manually at nominated locations. The details are usually compared with the actual timetable stored in a computer and reported by exception to nominated terminals on the computer's network.
Automatic Train Stop — (Regional, AU) A trackside device, normally linked to a signal, which can raise an arm to apply the automatic airbrake of trains fitted with trip valves.
Automatic Vehicle Identification (AVI) — (Regional, AU) A system which positively identifies a vehicle as it passes a location by reading an identification label on the vehicle, and relays this information to a control centre.
Automatic Warning System (AWS) — (Regional, AU) A system that provides audible and visual warnings to the driver on the approach to signals, certain level crossings and emergency, temporary and certain permanent speed restrictions. It supervises the driver's reaction to signal caution aspects and indicates to the driver the passing of a clear aspect. Mostly advisory, however it will cause a brake application to be made automatically if the driver fails to react when approaching a restrictive aspect.
Automatic Working (of A Controlled Signal) — (Regional, AU) A control function that enables a controlled signal to work automatically.
Automatic Worksite Warning System —  Refer: 'automatic track warning system'.
Auxiliary Optical System — (Regional, AU) Duplicate lamp or filament on hot or cold standby.
Auxiliary Supply Transformers — A transformer connected to the 25,000 volt overhead line equipment for the purpose of supplying standby power to trackside equipment.
Auxiliary Token Instrument — (Legacy) A supplementary token instrument usually located at the end of a token section but away from the signal box to facilitate prompt issue/return of tokens.
Availability — The percentage of time that an item or system is able to perform its designed function.
AVI — Automatic Vehicle Identification.
AWARE —  Abbreviated term for 'Australia Wide Augmented Radio Environments' train communications system.
AWS — Abbreviation for 'automatic warning system'. AWS is a system which warns the driver of the aspect of the next signal. It is an advisory system only.
Axis Bearings — Bearings mounted on the axle to transmit the main weight of the vehicle directly to the wheelset. Excludes bearings mounted on the axle to support traction motors, final drives etc.
Axle Counter — A vital (SIL rated) wheel presence detection system which encompasses wheel sensors, evaluation systems and associated hardware used to prove track vacancy.
Axle Load — The weight force exerted on the rails by the two wheels on any axle of a vehicle when stationary on level track.
Axlebox Bearings — Individual roller bearings that are set, lubricated and sealed after assembly on the axle.
Back Contact — That contact of a relay which is closed (made) only when the relay is de-energised (dropped).
Back Drive Points — (Regional, AU) A second drive position on the point switches used where the length of the switch is such that a single drive will leave the back part of the switch hanging off the stockrail. Location of the back drive is determined by switch length and it may be operated by rooding from the drive or by a separate point operating mechanism.
Back Light — (Regional, AU) A light showing through a small glass covered opening in the back of a signal lamp. A back light is used to provide signallers at night with a means of checking the position of a semaphore signal arm and the operation of the signal light.
Back Rod — (Regional, AU) The bar or rod connecting the switches usually placed one sleeper bay back from the front rod to provide extra support for the switches.
Backdrive — (Regional, AU) An alternative term for Supplementary Drive.
Background Plate — (Regional, AU) A plate set behind the light units of a signal to improve the visibility.
Backlocking — (Regional, AU) Prevention of completion of a lever stroke to the fully normal position until the conditions required by the interlocking are satisfied.
Backup Coupling Device — A secondary coupling device, which is in addition to the normal coupling system, for preventing the separation of two coupled vehicles whilst in traffic.
Balance Speed — A train travelling at an intermediate speed such that the outward centrifugal force is exactly balanced by the effect of the inward applied cant is said to be at Balance Speed or Equilibrium Cant. In this situation there is no net lateral force on the train as the forces inwards and outwards on the curve are balanced.
Ballse — A track mounted spot transmission unit that uses transponder technology. Its function is to transmit/receive messages to/from the train passing overhead.
Ballast — Stone or aggregate material spread on the ground for the purpose of holding the track in line laterally and longitudinally and also to provide drainage.
Ballast Depth — Distance from the formation to the base of the sleeper measured below the lowest rail seat. For steel sleepers the base of the sleeper is considered to be the sleeper toe.
Ballast Resistance — The resistance offered by the ballast, sleepers, etc., to the flow of leakage current from one rail of a track circuit to the other.
Ballast Shoulder — The ballast each side of the railway track.
Ballast Shoulder Height — Height of the shoulder ballast above the sleeper base as measured at the end of the sleeper.
Ballast Shoulder Width — Width of the shoulder ballast as measured from the sleeper end.
Balloon Loop — (Legacy) A circular portion of line that allows rail traffic to change direction of travel without change to the leading end.
Bank Locomotive — (Regional, AU) A locomotive provided to assist rail traffic on a steep grade (bank).
Banner Repeating Signal — (Regional, AU) A signal that provides the driver with preliminary information about whether a signal is on or off, usually provided where sighting of that signal is inadequate.
Banner Signal — (Regional, AU) A type of semaphore signal with a small semaphore arm enclosed behind glass, which gives its indication by horizontal or inclined positions of the arm which is illuminated a night.
Barrack Working — (Legacy) A train crew undertaking a journey from their home depot to another location, booking off duty and staying at a barrack for a minimum period as required, and return to their home depot. In any leg of these journeys the crew could either be working a train or travelling passenger.
barrier — A physical, man-made, continuous barrier which is clearly identifiable and of sturdy Construction, erected to deter unauthorised access to the rail corridor. Barriers include:- (a) Walls – Constructed from, but not limited to, brick, stone and concrete panels (b) Fences – Constructed from, but not limited to, post and wire, timber panelling, timber rails, steel railings and wire mesh and are at the appropriate minimum height specified according to a risk assessment and which can be fitted with topping to create an additional deterrent. (c) Boundary Measure - A man-made barrier or ‘natural’ feature (possibly modified), including but not limited to a ditch, hedge, watercourse or any other form of delineation which deters unauthorised access on to the rail corridor.
Base Ride Acceleration — Measurement of the vertical and lateral acceleration of the body of a rail vehicle under specific test conditions to assess its ride performance. Used to quantitatively assess the ride offered by the vehicle for comparison against dynamic performance requirements.
BauJk — (Regional, AU) A device placed across the rails and anchored to the track to stop vehicles should they begin to roll away.
Beacon —  A unit usually mounted in the track and used to transmit information between track and train at short range radio frequencies. An antenna on the train passes over the transponder and one interrogates the other. The transponder may be passive and powered by carrier energy transmitted from the train, or be active, transmitting continuously or only when interrogated by a train. The transponder may hold fixed information and/or receive updated information through connection to the signalling system.
Bearer — A type of sleeper used under points and crossing track structures. Bearers are generally larger in dimension than standard sleepers to provide support for both tracks as well as the increased loading experienced under such track structures.
Bed Of Sleepers — All the sleepers that are stressed and cast together in one concreting operation, and then cured in the same batch.
Bell Continuity Test — (Regional, AU) This is the process whereby the wiring is checked to see that it is in conformity with the wiring diagrams and that all wires are continuous from termination point to termination point. This test is generally carried out simultaneously with a wire count and insulation test.
Bellows — The weather proof and self-supporting gangway and covering provided between adjoining passenger vehicles to allow passengers to walk from one vehicle in a train to another.
Berth — A small sitting and/or sleeping compartment.
Berth Track (or Berth Track Circuit) — (Regional, AU) The track circuit immediately on the approach side of a signal.
BI-directional — Allowing for normal travel in either direction according to the infrastructure and system of Safeworking in use.
BI-directional Line — A line on which the signalling permits trains to be signalled normally in either direction.
BI-directional Signalling — Signalling which permits trains to be signalled normally in either direction on a running line.
BI-directional Track — Track which is signalled for trains to run in either direction.
BI-directional Working — Operation of a line where the flow of traffic can be authorised to move in either direction.
Biased Relay — (Regional, AU) A relay which will operate to its energised position by current of one polarity only, and will return to its de-energised position when current is removed.
Bifurcated Contact — (Regional, AU) Contact which splits into two near the contact end, to provide two co-acting but independent contact actions for increased contact reliability.
Blade —  Alternative term for Point Blade.
Blinder — (Regional, AU) A plate that covers a backlight to enable the signaller to see that a semaphore signal has correctly cleared to the off position.
Block Bell — (Legacy) A single stroke bell for communicating between control points by means of a code of audible signals.
Block Indicator — (Legacy) The part of the block instrument that provides the signaller with a continuous visual indication of the state of a line within a block section.
Block Instrument — (Legacy) The equipment in a signal box for the operation and indication of block signalling. The instruments are fitted with visual indicators which act as a reminder to the signaller as to the state of that block telegraph section. The block indicator in these block instruments shows 'line closed', 'line clear', 'train on line' and 'train arrived'.
Block Joint — (Non-preferred) Refer 'insulated rail joint'.
Block Line — A portion of track with defined limits between which only one rail traffic movement is permitted at any one time.
Block Location — A defined location that separates block sections. A location in Train Order territory that may be used as the limit of a Proceed Authority or as a reporting location, also known as 'block points'.
Block Point — A place where trains are not able to cross or pass that may be used as the limit of a Proceed Authority or as a reporting location.
Block Post — (Regional, AU) A temporary block location. A location in Train Order territory that may be used as the limit of a Proceed Authority or as a reporting location, also known as 'block points'. A signal box at one end of a block section in block signalling.
Block Proving — (Regional, AU) Block interlocking which prevents the sending of a 'section clear' indication for a train to the rear box, until the signals covering the block section entered by the train have been replaced to danger and locked in this position.
Block Section — (Regional, AU) Refer 'block' (Line).
Block Shelf — (Regional, AU) A shelf provided above the lever frame to hold equipment associated with control of the line, for example block Instruments, Indicators and other ancillary signalling equipment.
Block Signal — (Regional, AU) A stop signal that controls the entrance to, or signifies the termination of, a block or signal section.
Block Skip — (Regional, AU) Regional.
Block Station — The station at either end of a block section at which equipment is provided to control the movements of trains, and maybe attended or unattended.
Block Switch — (Regional, AU) A switch located in a signal box by means of which the signalling block circuits to the signal boxes on either side may be connected together, enabling the signal box in which the switch has been so operated to close.
Block Telegraph System — (Regional, AU) A system of safeworking used on double lines, usually in non track-circuited areas. Each interlocking is equipped with a block instrument(s). The instruments are electrically interconnected between interlockings to allow signallers to transmit train working signals to each other and to indicate the condition of the section. Under normal conditions, the authority for a train to occupy a section between interlockings is the clearing of the starting or home/starting signal.
Block Telegraph Territory — (Regional, AU) The portions of line where the block telegraph system of safeworking is used.
Block Track — A cast or fabricated spacer separating two rails or a rail and a check rail.
Block Wagons — A group of continuous wagons going to the same destination.
Block Working — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Manual Block Working. Refer to: Manual Block Working.
Blockage - Of Tracks — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Blocking Facility. Refer to: Blocking Facility.
Blockage Of Tracks — (Regional, AU) A procedure to prevent the movement of electric trains, or all trains, into a section of track.
Blocking — (Regional, AU) A means to prevent clearance of a signal when it is desired to inhibit entry of a train movement into the block section governed by the signal.
Blocking Back — (Regional, AU) Term used in absolute block and electric token block, when a train or shunting movement is to be allowed to occupy the line within the clearing point or on the approach to the home signal.
Blocking Facility — A facility or device used by a competent worker to prevent either the unintended issue of an occupancy authority, or the operation of points or signalling equipment.
Boarding Device — This includes ramps, on-board lifts mounted on rolling stock and on the platform.
Bogie — A structure incorporating suspension elements and fitted with wheels and axles, used to support rail vehicles at or near the ends and capable of rotation in the horizontal plane. It may have one, two or more axle sets, and may be the common support of adjacent units of an articulated vehicle. (The bogie is commonly referred to as a 'truck' in AAR terminology.)
Bogie Identification Code — A four letter group indicating ownership, bogie type and axle load.
Bogie Identification Number — Each bogie is allocated a number comprising 5 digits in the range of 1 to 99999.
Bogie Side L/V — Total sum of the lateral forces between the wheels and the rails on one side of a bogie divided by the total sum of the vertical forces on the same wheels of the bogie.
Bogie Structures — This includes the bogie frame, axleboxes, and other structural bogie components. Structural bogie components includes but is not limited to the following items and their associated bracketry: bolsters, spring planks, swing links, control rods, frame adaptors, equaliser beams, brake beams, air springs, anti-roll bars and links, vertical dampers, lateral dampers, yaw dampers, traction rods, torque motor reaction links.
Bolt Lock — (Regional, AU) A metal bar or plunger, combined with a cross-slide and arranged in such a manner as to prevent movement of the cross-slide when the plunger is inserted.
Bolted Rail Track —  Track in which rail lengths are joined with bolted mechanical joints, as opposed to welded track.
Bond — An electrical conductor complete with terminations which connects together items of equipment.
Bond Plug — (Regional, AU) The bullet-shaped piece of steel which is used to secure a plug bond.
Bond Reference — (Regional, AU) A number allocated by customs which allows a particular consignment to travel on a service prior to customs inspection.
Bond Wire — (Regional, AU) Solid or stranded wire which is welded or pinned with channel pins around rail joints to provide reliable electrical conductivity.
Bonded Joints — Metallic connections at rail joints to provide a continuous metallic path for the passage of electric currents from one rail to the other.
Bootleg — (Regional, AU) A protection for track circuit wires where the wires leave the conduit or ground near the rail. Generally a termination point between wires that connect to the rails and the corresponding cable leads that go to the trackside equipment location. Also known as 'bootleg riser' or 'pot head'.
Bottom Lift — A container which must be lifted from pockets in its base using special container grabs.
Bounce — The vertical displacement of the vehicle body relative to the rails that may be expected to occur in response to track irregularities.
Box — (Non-preferred) Alternative name for Container.
Box Car (or Box Wagon) — (Non-preferred) A fully enclosed vehicle with floor, side walls, end walls and roof, having one or more doors in each side.
Boxing Up — (Legacy) The process of filling the track with ballast to the specified ballast profile including the shoulder.
Brace —  Related Term: Rail Brace. Refer to: Rail Brace.
Brake — A system fitted to rollingstock to decelerate, stop and inhibit further movement. Usually achieved by means of compressed air, by rheostatic braking on wheelsets with electric traction motors or manually through mechanical means for handbrakes.
Brake Block Or Brake Shoe — The friction block (usually cast iron) that is placed onto the wheel rim via a series of rods and levers to slow the rolling stock down by the use of friction when the brakes are applied.
Brake Cylinder — A steel cylinder attached to the body frame or bogie frame of rolling stock containing a piston which is forced outwards by compressed air to apply the brakes. When the air pressure is released, the piston is returned to the normal position by a release spring coiled about the piston inside the cylinder.
Brake Delay Time — The time which elapses after a brake application is initiated until the train brakes start to apply.
Brake Head — A casting attached to a brake beam which carries the detachable brake shoe.
Brake Pipe — The pipe connecting the brake pipe to the air brake equipment on rollingstock.
Brake Rigging — The term applied to the entire system of levers, rods, fulcrums, brake beams and associated connections that serve to multiply the force created by the air pressure in the brake cylinder and transmit it to the brake shoes.
Braking Curves — Plots of speed against distance for the braking performance of particular trains from various speeds over various gradients.
Braking Distance — For a nominated portion of railway the maximum distance which any train operating on such portion of railway at its maximum authorised speed, will travel during a full service application of the brakes, between the point where such application is initiated and the point where the train comes to a stop.
Branch Line — (Legacy) A railway line that runs off a main line and generally carries less trains.
Branch Pipe — The pipe connecting the brake pipe to the air brake equipment on rolling stock.
Broad Gauge (track) — Track gauge of 1600 mm (5'3').
Broken Rail — A square or angular sudden rupture, transverse separation of the head, web and foot of the rail.
Broken Rail Detection — The detection of broken rails, usually through failure of track circuits which use the rails as conductors.
Brookfield Rail Network — Western Australia regional narrow and standard gauge network.
Buckle (track) — A substantial displacement of track from its original design alignment caused by longitudinal thermal stresses overcoming the lateral resistance of the track.
Buffer — A cushioning device mounted on the extreme ends of rolling stock to absorb shocks arising during coupling and motion.
Buffer Lock — Entanglement of the buffers of adjacent rolling stock whilst traversing curves.
Buffer Section — A buffer section consists of isolated and earthed subsection/s which provide electrical separation between energised and isolated overhead line equipment on which maintenance or repair work is to be carried out. The use of buffer sections is one of the methods used to prevent raised pantographs from energising isolated sections where workers are working on the overhead line equipment.
Buffer Stop — A structure erected across and at the end of a track at main line terminals or dead end sidings which is intended to stop rolling stock.
Buffer Stop Lights — (Regional, AU) Red or white lights (usually two, one above the other) mounted on the buffer stop or at the start of the sand drag.
Built-up Crossing — A crossing utilising a hardened, machined block in the wheel transfer area. Extension wing and running rails are welded to the machined block utilising specialised techniques. Also known as welded crossing.
Bulk Freight — Comprises commodities such as coal, iron ore, other minerals or grain.
Bund — A wall and floor of concrete or other approved impervious material, which may form part or the entire perimeter of a compound and is designed to prevent the escape of any material stored within it.
Cab Display Unit (CDU) — (Regional, AU) A device for use in the driving cabs that enables the user to receive and return coded electronic tokens, and to display electronic Tokens issued to it. The CDU may be transportable.
Cab Secure Radio (CSR) — (Regional, AU) A secure radio communication system between driver and signaler.
Cab Signal —  Related Term: In-cab Signalling. Refer to: In-cab Signalling.
Cable — An insulated electrical conductor, or group of conductors separately insulated and contained within the one insulating sheath.
Cable Joint — The electrical in-line connection of the conductors of two lengths of cable and the insulation and sealing of those connections.
Cable Pit — (Regional, AU) A partially buried chamber through which underground cables run and are accessible at that point. Frequently installed to facilitate the pulling of cables through underground conduits.
Cable Route — (Regional, AU) The route and its method of construction for cables running between equipment locations (main cables) or between equipment locations and trackside equipment (tail cables, local cables).
Cable Troughing — (Regional, AU) Lidded ducting for housing cable runs in surface cable routes, e.g. ground level troughing GLT or troughing elevated on posts (pegline).
Cabotage — The carriage of a container from a surplus area to an area specified by the owner of that container, in exchange for which and during the operator can use the container.
Cadweld — (Regional, AU) Commercial brand of copper aluminothermic weld commonly used for joining copper cables to rail, other cables or other steel structure.
Call-by — (Regional, AU) The authority given by a signaller to a driver to pass a signal at danger.
Call-on (route Class) — (Regional, AU) A route that is provided to permit a train movement into a section known to be occupied.
Calling On Signal — (Regional, AU) Subsidiary signal fixed under the accept/home, home or home/starting signal for the route concerned and when showing a 'proceed' indication authorises the driver to proceed under control into a section of line which may be obstructed at any point.
CAN — Condition Affecting the Network.
Cancel — To end previously authorised activities, such as Occupancy Authorities, without completing them.
Cancelling Indicator (AWS) — (Regional, AU) A lineside sign which denotes that an AWS warning does not apply to trains in that direction.
Cane Railway Network — (Regional, AU) A railway system dedicated to hauling harvested sugar cane from farms to a raw sugar factory. Typically 610 mm gauge.
Cant — Generally, the term Cant or Superelevation is used for intended height difference in the rails (i.e. where the track is inclined in a curve), and the term 'cross-level' is used for unintended height difference (i.e. due to track irregularity).
Cant Deficiency — A train travelling at line speed such that the outward centrifugal force is greater than the effect of the inward applied cant is said to be at Cant Deficiency. In this situation there is a net lateral force on the train towards the outside of the curve.
Cant Excess — A train travelling slowly or stopped such that the outward centrifugal force is less the effect of the inward applied cant is said to be at Cant Excess. In this situation there is a net lateral force on the train towards the inside of the curve.
Cant Imbalance — The term Cant Imbalance indicates a net lateral force on the train that could be towards the outside of the curve (Cant Deficiency), or towards the inside of the curve (Cant Excess).
Cant Ramp — A transition in applied cant to the track, usually at the entry or exit to a curve, which by design varies from a maximum value to zero, or vice versa, over a prescribed length of track.
Cantilever — (Regional, AU) A structure that incorporates an overhang, to position a signal head for signal sighting purposes.
Cantrail — Main longitudinal structural member of vehicle roof which forms the extreme edges of the frame.
Car —  Alternative (US) term for vehicle or wagon.
Carbon Silver Contact — Contact surfaces composed of silver impregnated carbon to prevent contact surfaces fusing together; this is considered to be a risk with using metal to metal contacts in signalling circuits, particularly front contacts of devices with gravity drop away.
Card —  Identifies a wagon with a mechanical defect. Also see 'defect card'.
Carriage — A passenger carrying vehicle unit.
Catch Handle — (Regional, AU) A handle on a mechanical lever attached to a latch which holds the lever in a specific position within the lever frame. Also referred to as 'catch-rod handle'.
Catch Points — A set of points designed to prevent unauthorised access to a section of track by prior intentional derailment of vehicle.
Category 'A' Incidents — These constitute the minimum standard requirements for incidents and accidents to be recorded by the Rail Transport Operator, for major incidents and accidents resulting in serious injury, death or significant damage.
Category 'B' Incidents — This set of incident types are mainly minor accidents or occurrences which constitute a breakdown in normal safety to be recorded by the Rail Transport Operator to enable satisfactory monitoring and analysis of safety related occurrences.
Catenary — In overhead electrification, the uppermost of the two overhead wires mounted above the track and supporting the contact wire.
Caution (aspect) — (Regional, AU) An aspect which advises the driver that the next signal may be at danger, requiring the train to stop. It is indicated by a single yellow (Aspect) or a semaphore distant arm horizontal.
Caution Board — (Regional, AU) Related Term: Temporary Speed Restriction Ahead Sign. Refer to: Temporary Speed Restriction Ahead Sign.
Caution Fixed Signal — (Regional, AU) An indication provided by a fixed signal. The next fixed signal may be at STOP.
Caution Handsignal — A handsignal given to indicate the need for rail traffic to proceed but being prepared to stop.
CBI — Abbreviated term for 'computer based interlocking'. Computer Based Interlocking (CBI).
CBTC — Abbreviated term for Communications Based Train Control. Communications Based Train Control (CBTC).
CCSB — Constant Contact Side Bearers. Constant Contact Side Bearers (CCSB).
CCTV — Abbreviated term for 'closed circuit television'. Closed Circuit Television (CCTV).
CDU — Abbreviated term for 'cab display unit'. Cab Display Unit (CDU).
CEMS — Abbreviation for 'Crash Energy Management System'. Crash Emergency Management System.
Centralised Traffic Control (CTC) — A system of Safeworking where points and signals at a number of locations are remotely controlled from a centralised control room or other locations.
Centralised Traffic Control (CTC) Territory — (Regional, AU) The portions of line where the Centralised Traffic Control system of Safeworking is used.
Centre Throw — (Regional, AU) The curve throw of the vehicle body towards the inside of a horizontal curve at the vehicle centre. The body centre is the position of maximum inwards curve throw for a symmetrical vehicle.
Centre-fed Track Circuit — (Regional, AU) A track circuit wherein the current is supplied at or near the centre with relays at each end.
Certification — The signing of certification documents by qualified, competent persons attesting that the design, product, or installation is in accordance with the specification requirements as verified by appropriate inspections and/or tests.
Certify — 1. To classify a worker as competent; or 2. To classify infrastructure or rolling stock as fit for purpose.
Cess — The area from the edge of the ballast profile to either the edge of the embankment or the toe of the cutting. cess drain: refers to the surface drain provided outside the sleepers to drain water from the ballast.
CFR —  Code of Federal Regulations (US).
Chair — A rail base plate fixed to the sleeper that provides vertical support to the rail.
Channel Pin — (Regional, AU) Crooved, tapered steel pin which is used to secure a bond wire to form a reliable connection between the rail and bond wire. It is driven into the hole in the web of the rail alongside the bond wire.
Check Locking — (Regional, AU) An arrangement to prevent the full stroke of a lever in a lever frame until such time as the apparatus controlled by that lever has completed its movement. Also see Backlocking.
Check Rail — Rails placed in track inside the running rail at particular locations which comes into contact with the back of the wheel flange to guide wheels through points and crossings, on curves and through flangeway gaps in streets.
Checking Circuit — (Legacy) Group of circuits used for the operation of checking apparatus.
Check Block — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Derailer. Refer to: Derailer.
Chopper Coupling — A coupling system between rolling stock which consists of a central buffer with a mechanical hook that drops into a slot in the central buffer.
Chromaticity (signal Lenses) — Colour quality expressed numerically.
Chromaticity Co-ordinates — Two numbers that fix the position of a point on a colour diagram in order to numerically and graphically represent the colour of a lens or light source. The numbers represent the proportions of two of three primary colours in a mixture that matches the colour specified. These proportions are expressed in terms of the co-ordinates x, y in the CIE colorimetric system (AS 2633).
Circuit — Related Term: Open Circuit. Refer to: Open Circuit. An arrangement of conductors and electrical apparatus connected to a source of electricity supply.
Circuit Breaker — A switch suitable for opening a circuit automatically as a result of predetermined conditions, such as those of overcurrent or undervoltage or by some form of external control.
Circuit Controller — A device for opening and closing electric circuits.
Circuit Function Test To Wiring Diagram — (Regional, AU) This is the energisation of each circuit, or part of a circuit, and verifying by operation or disconnection that each and every control device, fuse and link is effective in controlling the circuit function in accordance with the circuit diagram. The specific contacts on control devices such as relays are not verified.
Circuit Strap And Function Test To Wiring Diagram — (Regional, AU) This is a more in-depth circuit function test. It is the energisation of each circuit, or part of circuit, and verifying by operation or disconnection that each and every control contact, fuse and link is effective in controlling the circuit function in accordance with the circuit diagram.
Circular Curve — A curve of constant radius.
Civil Infrastructure — General term for all the fixed structures required for a railway line, i.e. the track and its foundations, bridges, drains, signals and overhead electrification.
Clamp Lock Point — (Regional, AU) A type of point operating mechanism which clamps the point switch to the stock rail. It provides direct switch to stockrail facing point locking through a vertically operating clamp arm and includes in-built point switch and lock detection and is hydraulically powered.
Class — A class of rolling stock is a group of vehicles built to the same design.
Claw Lock Point — (Regional, AU) A point operating mechanism which provides direct switch to stockrail facing point locking through a horizontally operating claw arm which requires external point switch and lock detection and is powered by a purpose built electric point machine or electro-pneumatic (EP) motor.
Clear — (Regional, AU) A proceed indication displayed by a signal. In reference to a track circuit, block, section or signal route, signifies the absence of rail traffic.
Clear And Complete — Rail traffic where the last vehicle of a consist has passed beyond a location.
Clearance Bar — (Regional, AU) A bar fixed alongside the rail and terminating at the clearing point of two converging lines. The clearance bar is interlocked with the points in such a manner that they cannot be moved while a train is passing over or standing on the bar.
Clearance Handsignaller — A handsignaller at a clearance location, who reports the clearance of rail traffic past that location.
Clearance Lines — The lines painted on the roadway to delineate the safe clearance between trams and other road vehicles.
Clearance Location — A location that, once clear of rail traffic, allows a following movement. Also known as clearance point.
Clearance Point — The nominated point where rail traffic are deemed clear of others at converging points or other locations. This point may or may not be delineated by signs or clearance post.
Clearance Post — A post, marker, light or disc to indicate the clearance point of two converging lines.
Clearance Sign — (Regional, AU) A sign defining the end of at the end of a temporary speed restriction or Work on Track Authority to indicate to rail traffic crew that normal track speed can be resumed.
Clearing Control — (Regional, AU) A control used on some block telegraph sections. On sections where clearing control is in operation, it prevents the block instrument at B from giving 'train arrived' until the train has arrived complete within the home signal at B.
Clip — Resilient rail fastening.
Clip Fastening Plate — A rail support plate designed for resilient fastenings.
Close Up Signal — (Regional, AU) A subsidiary signal fixed on the post of a signal and indicating, when cleared, that the line ahead is clear to the next 'stop' signal only.
Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) — Equipment that is used for remote monitoring and supervisory purposes, usually at a station platform or level crossing.
Closely Approaching — Going towards a location at a speed such that the train crews could not be expected to react in sufficient time to stop.
Closing Keys — (Regional, AU) Interlocking keys with bow handles for securing frames at stations and other places when closed.
Closing Lever — (Regional, AU) A lever, in an interlocking machine, which, when operated to reverse, will cause the signals on the main line through routes to either operate automatically or remain in the clear position.
Closing-up Signal — (Regional, AU) A signal that is provided to optimise headways and/or to provide earlier clearance of junctions on the approach to stations. It may or may not form part of the normal aspect sequence.
Closure List — (Regional, AU) Final index of design details issued to the tester-in-charge by the design organisation.
Closure Rail — (Overseas) A rail located between switch and crossing components, cut to a length to fit the requirements of the turnout.
Co-acting Signal — A signal, placed near another signal that might be temporarily obscured from a rail traffic crews view, to provide information about the obscured signal's indication.
Co-axial Cable — An insulated conductor within a conductive sleeve covered by an insulating sheath. The conductor and sleeve form the two conductors of the one circuit.
Coded Track Circuit — (Regional, AU) Impulse current track circuit in which the number, frequency, polarity or duration of the impulses or several of these characteristics at a time are utilised in order to permit selection of action on several receiving apparatus units, specially adjusted for these and connected to the same track circuit.
COFC —  Container on Flat Car.
Cold Standby — (Regional, AU) Form of redundancy in which the secondary equipment is normally powered down, to be switched in and begin operating and generating output after a failure of the primary equipment. Results in a loss of system function while the secondary equipment powers up and reaches operational status.
Collar — (Regional, AU) A facility that prevents the signaller from operating an item of signalling infrastructure. Either a physical item preventing the pulling of a lever or operation of a button, or an electronic equivalent indicated on the signallers workstation. The formal term for collar is reminder appliance.
Collision — A collision between trains, other rolling stock vehicles or obstructions on main running lines.
Colour Light Signal — A fixed signal which uses coloured electric lights to give the signal indications during both daylight and dark.
Combiner — (Regional, AU) Apparatus which, in certain route lever boxes, allows each route lever to operate controls of the various apparatus for that route.
Commission — To formally place into active service or use.
Common — occurring, found, or undertaken often; prevalent.
Common Rail — (Regional, AU) The rail of a single rail track circuit that is electrically common to one or more adjacent track circuits or forms the traction return path. In non-electrified areas the common rail is bonded with track circuit bonding. In electrified areas the common rail is known as the traction return rail and carries the traction return current. It is therefore bonded with traction return bonding.
Communication Device — A device that supports effective communication between Competent Workers.
Communications Based Train Control (CBTC) — A signalling system that makes use of the telecommunications between on-board equipment and wayside equipment for the traffic management and infrastructure control the ability to work in conjunction with another specified system An appliance with a pair of cranks so connected as to reverse the direction of travel in a run of iron rodding, and thereby counteract the expansion or contraction caused by changes of temperature.
Compatibility — A worker certified as competent to carry out the relevant task.
Compensator — Rail traffic where the consist has not parted.
Competent Worker — A combination of diamond and turnouts connecting the intersecting tracks within the diamond. Single compounds require two sets of points and double compounds require four sets of points.
Compound Curve — A curve comprising two or more differing radii but in the same direction.
Comprehensive Approach Locking — (Regional, AU) Approach locking including controls that will allow the immediate release of approach locking if no train is approaching the signal. It uses look back logic to ascertain the line occupancy between a given signal at danger and the sighting point of the signal displaying the first caution aspect for the signal under consideration.
Computer Assisted Train Orders — A computer system which assists the train controller in compiling, issuing, cancelling and recording train, mishap and shunt orders and track warrants, and provides a graphical representation of the extent of orders and warrants issued, location of trains and crossings programmed.
Computer Based Interlocking (CBI) — A computerised software system for providing the interlocking between points and signals.
Concentrator — (Regional, AU) A facility to connect several telephone circuits to one handset.
Concreted Track — (Regional, AU) Track constructed with concrete under and to the top of the rails.
Condition Affecting The Network (CAN) — A situation or condition that affects or has the potential to affect the safety of the network.
Conditional Clearance — (Regional, AU) The clearance of a train stop or signal at a reduced overlap clearance point, conditional upon trains approaching the train stop or signal at a reduced speed commensurate with the requirement of a reduced overlap distance.
Conditional Interlocking — (Regional, AU) Items of signalling equipment are fail safe where they are particularly specified, designed, manufactured, installed, inspected, tested and maintained such that the chance of an unsafe side failure is very low. Component parts are robust, electrical leakage distances are long, operating characteristics have large margins, etc.
Conditional Locking — Interlocking between two movable parts occasioned by the particular positions of other parts.
Conditional Proceed Authority — An authority to proceed in the indicated direction conditional upon the rail traffic crew obeying instruction to cross other rail traffic specified in the associated crossing instructions.
Conflicting Locking — Interlocking between two routes that require one or more points set in opposite positions. Also see Direct Opposing Locking.
Conflicting Routes — Two or more routes, opposing, converging, or intersecting, over which train movements cannot be made simultaneously without possibility of collision.
Conformal Contact — Wheel and rail profiles that have a very similar shape. A measure of that closeness is that conformal contact should have a maximum gap of 0.1mm between the undeformed shapes of the wheel and rail profiles at the gauge corner.
Connecting Rod — The rod connecting the spreader bar to the point lever or other operating mechanism.
Consist — Listed order of the vehicles arranged to make up a complete train.
Consolidated Yard — (Regional, AU) An area where interlocking’s controlled by one signalling location have intervening permissive signals. The area is defined exclusively by a YARD LIMIT sign and an END OF YARD LIMIT sign.
Conspicuity — Easily seen or noticed; readily visible or observable.
Constant Contact Side Bearers (CCSB) — Type of side bearer in which they are sprung and in constant contact with the underside of the wagon body, as opposed to a sidebearer is solid and has an air gap.
Constrained Curving — A description related to curving performance of a rail vehicle. A condition where, as well as the leading wheelset of a bogie or rigid vehicle wheelbase being in flange contact with the outer rail of a curve, the trailing wheelset of the bogie or rigid vehicle wheelbase is also in flange contact with the inner rail of the curve.
Construction Engineer — An engineer engaged to be in charge of a track or infrastructure work site, or section of line upgrading program.
Construction Joints — A joint in a structure made for convenience of construction. It has to be designed so that the load-carrying capacity and serviceability of the structure will be unimpaired by inclusion of the joint.
Contact — A pair of conducting pieces which co-act to open or close an electric circuit.
Contact Adjustment — Adjustment of the operating linkages, cams, armature, or the position of the contact pieces, to open and close the contact as required in relation to the operating mechanism.
Contact Gap — Distance between parts of a contact when open.
Contact Proving Test — This is an apparatus inspection and apparatus function test to prove that equipment contacts are the correct type, are correctly adjusted and electrically open and close when the equipment is operated.
Contact Resistance — The electrical resistance produced by the contact of two conductive surfaces.
Contact Wipe — (Regional, AU) A wiping action as contact surfaces initially come together and compress, to provide a reliable, low resistance electrical contact.
Contact Wire — A bare solid conductor being the lowest of the two overhead wires mounted directly above the track centreline. The pantographs of electric trains press against the underside of this wire and collect the current required by the train.
Contactor — (Regional, AU) An electromagnetic device, usually a solenoid with tractive armature, which operates heavy duty contacts for controlling high current electrical circuits.
Container — An independent unit either open or fully enclosed designed for intermodal transport of commodities. Intermodal containers are designed with standard corner fittings for positive securing to rail vehicles, road trucks and sea vessels. container well wagon or container well car: A well wagon specially equipped with approved securing devices for the transport of freight containers.
Container Flat Wagon — A flat wagon specially equipped with approved securing devices for the transport of freight containers. The wagon may have a full width deck, with or without apertures, or be of skeletal construction. Also known as a container flat car.
Container Well Wagon — A well wagon specially equipped with approved securing devices for the transport of freight containers. Also known as a container well car.
Contenary Wire —  A bare solid conductor (Contact Wire) installed in lieu of catenary wires at stations, under bridges and at level crossings.
Continuity Jumper — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Refer to: Jumper.
Continuity Test — (Regional, AU) This is the process whereby the wiring is checked to see that it is in conformity with the wiring diagrams and that all wires are continuous from termination point to termination point. This test is generally carried out simultaneously with a wire count and insulation test.
Continuous Welded Rail (CWR) — Track where the rail is joined by welding (and other non-moveable joints such as glued insulated joints) in lengths greater than 300 metres.
Contraction — The shortening of rails under the influence of falling temperatures.
Contractor — Contracting companies, sub-contractors and rail safety workers working for either of these.
Contraflexure Turnout — (Regional, AU) A turnout on a curve where the direction of the turnout diverging move is opposite to the curve.
Control — (Regional, AU) Operation effecting the working of a function from a distance. By extension, the whole of the gear which effect s its working.
Control Area — The area of the railway controlled or supervised by a particular signal box or control centre, as defined by the signalling plan.
Control Centre —  Related Term: Network Control. Refer to: Network Control.
Control Circuit — Group of circuits used in electric control.
Control Device — A lever, switch, signalling panel button, VDU monitor target etc which is operated by the signaler to set points and routes, clear and replace signals and operate other signalling functions.
Control Indicator — (Regional, AU) An indicator on the track indicator diagram in signal boxes worked under the track block system. When the signaler at B reverses the accepting lever, the control indicator at A displays a white light indicating that the section from A to the clearing point at B is unoccupied and that B has accepted the train.
Control Lever — Part of the control equipment which is worked manually in order to control a function.
Control Panel — A panel which incorporates a layout of tracks for the area controlled from the signal box and which contains levers for the control of signals, routes, points, releases, etc. In certain cases, the control panel is combined into the track indicator diagram.
Control Point — (Regional, AU) A signal box, including a control centre, gate box or ground frame.
Control Repeater — (Regional, AU) An indicator on the track indicator diagram in signal boxes worked under the track block system. When the signaler at B reverses the accepting lever, the control repeater at B will display a green light.
Control Table — A part of the signalling system specification that defines the detail of the signalling controls for each signalling function.
Controlled Absolute Signal —  A signal that is controlled or operated by a network control officer or competent worker. The signal must not be passed at stop without authority.
Controlled Automatic Signal — (Regional, AU) See 'semi-automatic signal' under term Automatic Signal.
Controlled Level Crossing — A level crossing with active warning operated under supervision and interlocked with protecting signals. It may be monitored by closed circuit television (CCTV) where the level crossing is out of sight of the controlling signal box.
Controlled Location — (Regional, AU) A location where a network control officer controls the signalling and safeworking operations either on-site or remotely.
Controlled Signal — A signal that is, or may be, controlled or operated by a network control officer or competent worker.
Controlled Signal Blocking (CSB) — (Non-preferred) Refer 'Absolute Signal Blocking' (ASB).
Controlled Signal Working Automatically — (Regional, AU) A control function that enables a controlled signal to work automatically. Also see Automatic Reclearing.
Controlled Speed — Controlled speed is a speed that allows rail traffic to stop short of an obstruction within half the distance of clear line that is visible ahead.
Conventional Wheelset — A wheelset having two wheels interference fitted to the axle and two outboard bearings.
Converging — (Lines) meeting and joining to become one line.
Converse Locking — The provision of locking between functions to ensure that conditions cannot be broken down, that is if 1 locks 2, then 2 must lock 1. This form of locking is provided automatically by mechanical interlocking. Also known as Reciprocal Locking.
Convoy — A group of track vehicles not coupled but travelling closely together under a single occupancy authority.
Correlation — The comparison of the configuration and version status of a system with the design records to ensure that the two are in agreement.
Correspondence — The agreement of the Interlocking with the detected state of a signalling function.
Correspondence Proving — Checking which ascertains that an apparatus is in the position corresponding to its controlling lever or switch.
Correspondence Test — This is a through test to verify that a function is in correspondence with its respective controlling equipment and/or indicating equipment. It includes an out of correspondence test to prove that if the function does not fully respond this is detected.
Corridor — The term corridor refers to capital city to capital city legs. For example, Perth - Sydney freight travels on the Adelaide-Perth corridor and the Sydney-Adelaide corridor. This is the preferred term to the traditional 'Up' and 'Down' trains used by state-based systems.
Counter Conditional Locking — Interlocking which prevents a condition (upon which other interlocking is dependent) from being destroyed.
Counting Head — Wheel presence detection equipment that is fixed to the rail. Each counting head assembly consists of two counting heads and determines the number and direction of axles passing it.
Coupler — The mechanism for joining two rail vehicles together.
Coupler Carrier — The horizontal bracket on the headstock of the rolling stock which supports the coupler shank.
Coupler Head Shelf — A horizontal ledge which is part of the coupler head which limits the relative vertical movement between the couplers.
Coupler Height — The height measured from the top of rail to the centre of the knuckle of an automatic coupler or to the horizontal centre line of the shank of a drawbar.
Coupler Lighting — Lighting of inter-vehicle coupling equipment.
Cow Catcher — An extension of vehicle body underneath the headstock at a cab end to deflect large obstacles from the track. Also known as an Obstacle Deflector or Pilot.
Crank — A lever, the arms of which forms an angle, which pivots around an axis and is used to transmit motion from one rod to another rod.
Crank Handle — A portable handle for insertion in point machines to enable them to be operated manually.
Crash Emergency Management System — A system integrated into a vehicle body design for controlling the energy absorbed, deceleration and structural deformation during crashes, in particular collisions.
Creep (rail) — The permanent or progressive longitudinal movement of rails in track caused by expansion or contraction of the rail or the action of traffic.
Creep Monument — A permanent monument located at the side of the track (i.e. in the cess or the six foot) to facilitate the accurate measurement of rail creep. Measurements are taken between a marker on the monument and punch marks made on the side of the rail head.
Creep Signals — (Regional, AU) Alternative term for Loading / Unloading Indicators.
Crib Crossing — A crossing of tracks with fencing arranged to orientate pedestrians to look in both directions before crossing the tracks. These crossings are usually only provided with passive protection.
Critical Design Stress — In structural design, it is usually taken as either the yield stress, 80% of the ultimate stress or the critical buckling stress whichever is less.
Critical Speed — The lowest speed at which hunting is demonstrated. Can also be used to describe speed at which a resonant response occurs with cyclic track irregularities.
Cross — To go past other rail traffic travelling in the opposite direction.
Cross Bond — A jumper cable cross-connecting the common rails or centre points of impedance bonds of parallel tracks to form a mesh of alternate paths for traction return current.
Cross Level — The difference in level of the two rails in a track. Also known as Superelevation or Cant. Generally, the term cant or superelevation is used for intended height difference in the rails (i.e. where the track is inclined in a curve), and the term cross-level is used for unintended height difference (i.e. due to track irregularity).
Cross Level Variation — 1. The variation of the actual cross-level at one track position from the design cross-level at that position; or 2. The variation in actual cross-level at two longitudinally separated positions along the track in order to determine track twist.
Cross-arm — A timber arm, usually fastened at right angles to an electrical service pole, designed to carry the pins and insulators to which aerial line wires may be attached. The line wires are conductors for an electrical circuit e.g. signalling circuit, telecommunications circuit.
Crossing — A track component that enables a wheel travelling along one rail to pass through the rail of a track which crosses its path. The most common types are 'V' and 'K'. Sometimes called the Erog.
Crossing Angle — The angle of approach between the two roads of a turnout or diamond crossing.
Crossing Location — May consist of single or double ended portion of track, to hold rail traffic, connected to a main line that is used to permit other rail traffic to cross or pass.
Crossing Loop — A length of track connected to the main line by switches at both ends to provide a facility that permits trains to both cross and pass each other.
Crossing Movement — A movement which allows trains travelling in opposite directions on single tracks to go past each other at a station.
Crossing Number — Crossings may be designated by a number which refers to the cotangent of the splay angle or rate of slope (commonly referred as angle).
Crossingwork — An item of trackwork such as a crossing or set of points.
Crossingwork Assembly — An assembly of crossingwork (e.g. points and crossings), including lead rails, making up a complete layout (e.g. turnout or crossover).
Crossingwork Layout — An assembly of crossingwork and lead rails providing a track crossing or turning out function.
Crossover - Track — A portion of line that is used to divert rail traffic from one continuing line to another.
Crossover - Train Crews —  Crew from a pair of trains heading in opposite directions swap so that the crews finish their shift from where they started (generally applies to long distance rail).
CSB — Related Term: Absolute Signal Blocking (ASB). Refer to: Absolute Signal Blocking (ASB).
CSR —  Cab Secure Radio.
CTC — Abbreviated term for 'centralised traffic control'. Centralised Traffic Control (CTC).
Cubic/dense — Cubic and dense relates to the type of freight being moved. The two form the ends of the scale with respect to the weight to space ratio. Freight which is heavy for the amount of space it consumes, such as beer or pavers, is referred to as dense. Freight that is light for the amount of space it consumes, such as potato chips or white goods, is referred to as cubic. Cubic freight is generally carried in taller and longer containers, such as 12.2m and 14.6m while dense freight is usually carried in shorter 6.1m containers or half height containers.
Curtain Side Wagon Or Car — A box car in which the side walls consist entirely or predominantly of weatherproof flexible panels.
Curve — A track with a continuous change in direction of alignment by means of an arc.
Curve Throw — The extent to which a transverse cross-section of a vehicle is displaced inwards or outwards from the track centreline on a horizontal curve, or upwards and downwards on a vertical curve.
Cut Section (line Circuit) — (Regional, AU) The sectioning of line circuits to avoid exceeding the maximum length allowed, for instance, in a.c. electrified territory.
Cut Section (track Circuit) — (Regional, AU) A method of reducing the continuous length of a track circuit by the use of individual track circuits, but indicated as a single track section on the signallers panel. Also known as 'multi-section track circuit'.
Cut Track (track Circuit) — (Regional, AU) A track circuit which has its feed open circuited by the front contacts of the next track relay ahead so that the track circuit cannot pick up until the next track circuit picks up.
CWR — Abbreviated term for 'continuous welded rail'. Continuous Welded Rail (CWR).
Danger (aspect) — (Non-preferred) An indication given by a signal to stop.
Danger Zone — Everywhere within 3m horizontally from the nearest rail and any distance above or below this 3m, unless a safe place exists or has been created.
Dangerous Goods — Materials defined under the Australian Code for the Transport of Dangerous Goods by Road and Rail ADG code.
Dangerous Goods Licence — Required by State or Territory legislation for the storage of dangerous goods above minor thresholds.
Dark Territory — (Regional, AU) Track where the system of Safeworking does not indicate the real-time position of rail traffic.
Data (signalling) — (Regional, AU) Site specific geographical and control information in an electronic form, which may be of safety-critical nature or otherwise.
Data Event Logger, Data Logger Or Data Recorder —  Train safety recording device.
DC Track Circuit — (Regional, AU) A track circuit with a direct current track feed.
DDA — Abbreviated term for the ‘Australian Disability Discrimination Act’ 1992.
De-energised Overhead Wiring — Disconnected from any live electrical equipment, usually by the opening of a circuit breaker.
De-energised Position — The position assumed by the moving member of an electromagnetic device when the device is deprived of its operating current. Mostly the moving member opens and closes electrical contacts which are used in control and/or indication circuits.
Dead End Signal — (Regional, AU) Shunting signals applying to short movements from the running line to a dead end siding or yard.
Dead Locking — (Regional, AU) Locking which is not conditional on any other control.
Dead Section — (Regional, AU) A section of track, either within a track circuit or between two track circuits, the rails of which are not part of a track circuit for detecting trains.
Deadman System — Also known as an ‘operator enable system’ or ‘driver safety control’.
Defect Card - Green Card — A card placed in the waybill clip of a vehicle to notify all concerned that repairs are required on that vehicle, however the vehicle may remain in traffic until it is operationally practicable to effect those repairs.
Defect Card - Red Card — A card placed in the waybill clip of a wagon to notify all concerned that that particular vehicle is NOT fit for traffic and must be repaired prior to returning to traffic.
Degraded Mode — The state of the part of the railway system when it continues to operate in a restricted manner due to the failure of one or more components.
Degraded Mode Operations With Train Protection & Control (TPC) — This is operations with Train Protection And Control (TPC) System but when some part of the TPC system has failed. E.g.: Failure of signal equipment, train-track communication, driver display, services or some operating parameter of the System is not yet validated.
Delayed Action Electro-mechanical Treadle — Electro-mechanical treadle the contacts of which being actuated return to the original, position after a certain delay.
Delegated Yellow (aspect) — (Regional, AU) A signal to which approach control has been applied where speed must be reduced before the next signal, for example warning (route class).
Delegate — A Competent Worker authorised and designated to act in place of another.
Demarcation Fencing — Easily-seen, continuous worksite safety boundary markers approved by the Rail Infrastructure Manager.
Departure Train Examination (DX) — (Regional, AU) DX (roll by) examinations are to be conducted where possible on departure from a train's originating location en route. Depending upon the location and the availability of staff, these examinations may be performed by examining staff, train crews, yard or station staff.
Dependability — A collective term used to describe the availability performance and its influencing factors: reliability performance, maintainability performance and maintenance support performance. It is non-quantitative.
Dependent Contact — (Regional, AU) A changeover contact of a relay where the contact armature connects to either a front contact point or a back contact point depending on whether the relay is energised or de-energised.
Depression Bar — (Regional, AU) A bar fixed along side the rail at rail level and when depressed by the flanges of a wheel prevents the movement of points.
Derali Device — A device intended to guide the wheels of rail traffic off rails.
Derailer — A specially shaped block placed over one rail of a siding to protect main line traffic from any runaway vehicles or unauthorised moves. This protection is achieved by derailing any locomotive or wagon that comes in contact with the derail. In some terminals derails are also used to prevent unauthorised entry into sidings. Alternative device to protect vehicles rolling away onto the main line: catch point.
Deraliment — An incident where at least one rolling stock wheel leaves the rail whilst the rolling stock is in motion or where the wheel of stationary rolling stock leave the rail as a result of a collision.
Design Certification — Certification that the design complies with the defined standards and requirements.
Design Details — (Regional, AU) Any plans, control tables, engineering details and data that are required to sufficiently define the signalling system.
Design Integrity Test — (Regional, AU) This is a system interlocking and control function test similar to the function test to the control tables, but working from the operational requirements and signalling principles, not directly from interlocking and control tables or aspect sequence charts.
Design Neutral Temperature — Design temperature at which there are no temperature induced stresses in the rail. Used in relation to continuously welded rail or rail with mechanical joints where a rail joint gap is also specified.
Design Verification — A design check made by an independent competent professional engineer.
Destress — The procedure used to ensure that there is no longitudinal stress in a rail when it is at a nominated stress free temperature.
Detectable — Rolling stock able to reliably activate track circuits.
Detection (of Points) — The proof of the position of the points (normal or reverse) to the interlocking equipment.
Detonating Signals — (Obsolete) Impact explosive devices secured on top of the rail of the track to be protected, to attract the attention of train crews.
Detonator — (Obsolete) Related Term: Railway Track Signal. Refer to: Railway Track Signal.
Detonator Placer — (Obsolete) An appliance for placing one or more detonators on the running line.
Diamond Crossing — An arrangement of 2 'V' and 2 'K' crossings together with two pairs of guard rails whereby one track crosses another.
Diesel Locomotive — A locomotive in which electric current from a diesel motor driving generators or alternators is delivered to traction motors on the axles for propulsion.
Differential (speed Restriction) — (Regional, AU) A speed restriction having up to three values, each of which is applicable to different types of train.
Dimming Switch — (Regional, AU) A switch, located in a signal box, used to decrease the brightness of colour light signals at night and increase it during daylight.
Dip — (Legacy) A downward variation in the running surface of a rail as may occur at welds or rail ends.
Direct Fixation — The system of fixation of track directly to a structure or continuous concrete base.
Direct Interlocking — Interlocking produced by direct action of the interlocking apparatus (or groups of apparatus) on the fittings interlocked and which is independent of all other apparatus.
Direct Opposing Locking — (Regional, AU) Interlocking between two routes in opposite directions for which the lie of all points is the same.
Direct Track Locking — (Regional, AU) Locking of movable components, for example, points when a train is present. This is not conditional on the points being set or locked.
Direct Traffic Control (DTC) Territory — (Regional, AU) The portions of line where the Direct Traffic Control system of Safeworking is used.
Direction Lever — (Regional, AU) A non-token system of single line working usually requiring continuous train detection through the section. A form of track circuit block.
Directional Travel Station — A station at which the points are normally set to allow simultaneous entry and exit of trains through the up and down lines.
DIRN — Abbreviation for 'Defined Interstate Rail Network'.
Disabled — In realtion to rail traffic, Unable to travel without assistance due to a defect.
Disc Signal — (Regional, AU) Displays a red signal during daylight or coloured lights at night or where visibility is reduced. Original A shunting signal or subsidiary signal consisting of a small disc which rotates to indicate a change of aspect.
Disconnected Signal — (Regional, AU) A signal that has been adjusted to ensure that it shows only the most restrictive aspect for one or more of its routes.
Disconnection Box — (Overseas) The disconnection or restriction of use of signalling equipment agreed between maintenance and operations staff to enable work to be carried out on the equipment. Also see 'possession'.
Discreet Channel — A system in which only the intended participants in a radio or telephone conversation can take part in the conversation.
Distant Board — (Regional, AU) A reflectionised sign that is equivalent to a fixed distant signal.
Distant Lookout — A qualified and competent worker who provides advance warning to the site lookout.
Distant Signal — (Regional, AU) A signal (not itself a stop signal) capable of displaying a cautionary aspect that informs the driver of the state of the signals or level crossing ahead.
Disturbed Or Abnormal Operations With TPC — This is when all TPC systems are operating but an external operational constraint is imposed to mitigate risk to operations. (E.g.: Application of a temporary speed restriction or re-routing of normal services.)
Diverging Line — Dividing into two lines.
Diverging Route — (Regional, AU) In the signalling of junctions, any route that diverges from the fastest/equal or straight route.
DLB —  Double line Block.
DMU —  Diesel Multiple Unit.
Dog Chart — (Regional, AU) A pictorial representation of the interlocking elements required to make-up mechanical locking. An alternative term for locking chart.
Dog spike — A steel fastener used on timber sleepers for holding down rail at the foot and to maintain gauge.
DOI —  Abbreviated term for 'Department of Infrastructure' (Victoria).
Doil — (Regional, AU) A short post on a cantilever or gantry, on which is mounted one or more semaphore signals.
DOO —  Driver Only Operation.
DOTARS —  Department of Transport and Regional Services.
Double Check Gauge — The distance between the guard edges of double check rails.
Double Junction — (Regional, AU) The point of junction of two double track routes. It comprises two turn outs and a diamond crossing.
Double Light Signalling — (Regional, AU) A system of colour light signalling where a running signal indication is given by two colour lights.
Double Line — Two adjacent, parallel, running lines. In double line areas, trains are generally permitted to travel in one direction only on each line (except during bi-directional or single line working).
Double Line Block (DLB) Territory — The portions of line where the Double Line Block system of Safeworking is used.
Double Line Working — The operation of two parallel main lines carrying traffic in each direction on a separate track.
Double Or Delta Crossover — Crossingwork assembly comprising two crossovers intersecting in the form of a diamond between the centrelines of the outside tracks.
Double Rail Track Circuit — A track circuit which uses both rails for signalling purposes. In electrified areas both rails are also used as traction return rails.
Double Shoulder Plate — A rail support plate designed with a shoulder on each side of the rail foot which is normally used with dogspikes.
Double Slip — (Regional, AU) A combination of a diamond crossing with four point ends without the need of separate crossings (points).
Double Stack — (Regional, AU) This refers to the practice of stacking one container on top of another on a wagon. This allows more containers to be carried for the given train length, making the trains more efficient. It is currently only possible to double stack within the area bounded by Adelaide, Parkes in western NSW, Perth and Alice Springs primarily due to tunnels and lower bridges in the eastern states.
Double Switched Circuits — (Regional, AU) Circuits which are switched on both the active and common (or positive and negative) sides of the controlled function by each of the controlling functions.
Double Track — Consists of two parallel tracks, typically for trains travelling in opposite directions at the one time without the need for passing loops.
Double Yellow (aspect) — (Regional, AU) A preliminary caution displayed by a colour light signal in four aspect signalling informing the driver to expect the next main signal to be at single yellow.
Down Line — (Regional, AU) In a double line area, the lines are generally referred to as the Down Line and Up Line. Usually, the down line is used by trains travelling away from the State Capital. However, local notices should be referenced to check this at any location.
DPI —  Department of Primary Industries (WA).
DPI (NT) —  Abbreviation for 'Department of Planning and Infrastructure' (NT).
DPTI —  Department of Planning Transport and Infrastructure (SA).
DPTI (SA) — Abbreviated term for 'Department of Planning, Transport and Infrastructure' (SA).
DRA —  Drivers Reminder Appliance.
Draftgear — Components which provide resilience in the connection of the coupling system to the structure of the rolling stock.
Draftgear Yoke — The component of the drawgear connected to the coupler within which the draftgear resides.
Draw Ahead (aspect) — (Regional, AU) A position light subsidiary signal that instructs the driver to 'draw ahead', for example, sufficiently to enable a set back move over a trailing connection to take place. An alternative term for 'calling-on' or 'shunt-ahead signal'.
Draw Hook And Screw Coupling — (Legacy) A coupling system between rolling stock which can only accept draft loads and relies on headstock buffers to accept buffing loads.
Drawbar — A rigid connection between two items of rolling stock which is only intended to be separated in a shop, rather than in normal operation.
Drawgear — A set of fittings used to connect railway vehicles for the purpose of transmitting longitudinal forces between adjacent vehicles; connection can be made manually or automatically.
Drive Rod — (Regional, AU) The rod between the drive mechanism and the front rod.
Driver — (Non-preferred) A Competent Worker controlling the movement of rail traffic.
Driver Only Operation (DOO) — The operation of a train by a driver without another driver or other person in the driver’s cabin who is qualified in, and has suitable experience in, the operation of the rollingstock and the safe working rules that form part of the network rules.
Driver Supervisory System — A system fitted to a vehicle that can monitor the driver (or train) condition or performance and apply the train brakes when a measured condition or performance parameter violates a required state or limit.
Driver-alone Operation — (Regional, AU) Operations in which one sole rail safety worker has the responsibility for the control, operations and procedures of a train.
Drivers Reminder Appliance (DRA) — (Regional, AU) A device in a driving cab to enable the driver to set a reminder. Whilst set it prevents the driver from taking power.
DSAPT —  Disability Standards for Accessible Public Transport 2002.
DSFAPT —  Abbreviation for the 'Disability Standards for Accessible Public Transport' 2002 and Amendments which states requirements for transport providers and operators to meet the Disability Discrimination Act.
DTC —  Direct Traffic Control.
DTEI —  Department of Transport, Environment and Infrastructure (SA).
DTMR —  Department of Transport and Main Roads (QLD).
Dual Control Points — (Regional, AU) A power operated point machine also equipped for hand operation.
Dual Gauge Crossingwork Assembly — An assembly of crossingwork arranged to permit both broad gauge and standard gauge traffic on the through and turnout moves.
Dual Gauge Track — Track that is constructed with a mixture of both standard gauge (1435 mm) and broad gauge (1600 mm) widths, or standard and narrow gauge (1067 mm) widths utilising a common rail.
Dual Gauge Turnout — A turnout incorporating dual gauge crossingwork units.
Dummy Hose Coupling — A casting, the same shape as a hose coupling, into which the coupling may be hooked. It is used to prevent dirt from getting into the brake pipe as well as preventing the hose coupling from being damaged when not in use.
Dummy Point Slide Chair — The short point slide chair ahead of the toe of the switch.
Dunnage — (Legacy) Loose material such as timber, steel or synthetic beams or wedges laid beneath or wedged between loads carried by rail to support, separate or restrain loads and prevent damage.
Duplex — A communication system that can transmit and receive at the same time, similar to a telephone system.
Duplex Lock — (Regional, AU) A lock operated by an annett key to release another annett key which is then used to unlock signalling equipment. One key is always held captive in the duplex lock when the other is out.
Dwarf Signal — (Regional, AU) Small size semaphore or colour light signals which can be either mechanically or power worked. These signals are usually used where they can be easily seen from short distance and the speed of approaching trains is low, such as in a shunting yard.
DX —  Departure Train Examination.
Dynamic Behaviour — The performance of the vehicle when moving along the track.
Dynamic Braking — Braking that uses the momentum of the locomotive and train to cause a braking effect. The traction motors are in effect turned into generators and the power is dissipated as heat through fan blown grids on the locomotive.
Earth Isolation — (Regional, AU) Signalling circuits are insulated/isolated from earth and the presence of any earth fault on wiring is a definite danger to signalling circuitry and calls for protective measures to be taken.
Easer (tread) Rail — A rail placed with its head along the outside and close to the head of the running rail and sloped at the ends to provide a bearing for the overhanging portion of hollowed out treads of worn wheels.
EATO —  Electronically Assisted Train Order.
ECO —  Electric Control Operator.
Effective Communication — The ability to successfully send, receive and understand information. The communication does not need to be continuous.
Electric Control Centre — A building containing apparatus for the control of the feeder stations, track sectioning cabins and equipment associated with the overhead line equipment.
Electric Control Operator (ECO) — (Regional, AU) The worker in charge of the electrical control room, who controls the power supply to the overhead traction wiring equipment, and is responsible for all switching operations and isolations of electrical equipment.
Electric Lock — (Legacy) An electromagnetic device which prevents or restricts the movement of a mechanical lever in an interlocking frame, or other appliance, from being partially or completely operated.
Electric Locomotive —  As distinguished from a diesel locomotive, the traction motors obtain power from a wire suspended above the track. Contact is made to this wire by a pantograph mounted on the roof of the locomotive.
Electric Staff —  A metal rod of prescribed design used as a token to authorise train movements into or through a block in electric staff territory.
Electric Staff Instrument — (Regional, AU) Also referred to as 'electric train staff instrument'.
Electric Staff System — (Regional, AU) A system of safeworking, usually used on single lines in non track-circuited areas, to allow trains to travel safely in either direction.
Electric Staff Territory — (Overseas) Under normal conditions the authority for a train to occupy the section is a metal token known as an electric staff obtained from an electric train staff instrument.
Electric Token Block — (Overseas) The portions of line where the electric staff system of safeworking is used.
Electric Token Block — (Regional, AU) A signalling system used on single lines controlled by the use of physical tokens, only one of which can be released from the instruments for a section at any one time. The released token is the prime authority to enter the token section.
Electric Token Instrument — (Overseas) The equipment in a signal box for the operation of electric token block. Contains one or more electric tokens.
Electric Traction Infrastructure — Equipment and systems associated with the supply and reticulation of electricity for traction purposes, but excluding elements of civil infrastructure supporting or otherwise associated with the equipment or systems.
Electric Train — A train comprising one or more electric multiple units or a train hauled by an electric locomotive.
Electric Vehicle Maintenance Centre (EVMC) — A designated location where maintenance work is carried out on electric traction vehicles.
Electrical Control — Control, the operation of which is effected by a device using electric current.
Electrical Depression Bar — Apparatus with a bar and contacts which are operated when the wheels of a vehicle depress the bar.
Electrical Infrastructure — Equipment and systems for supplying and distributing electricity for traction purposes, Wires, cables, and electrical equipment associated with low-voltage electrical switch rooms, signalling and substations.
Electrical Interlocking — (Regional, AU) Interlocking utilising the action of an electric current and which may act on a piece of apparatus by: a) immobilising its control lever (by electric lock) b) making inoperative the actuating of its control.
Electrical Point Indicator — (Regional, AU) A colour light signal for indicating the position of points or detail.
Electrical Representative — A person with the appropriate delegated authority and electrical engineering competence to make judgments about electrical safety.
Electrical Safety Instructions — Instructions provided by the Rail Infrastructure Manager's Electrical Maintenance Representatives for work on or near electrical infrastructure.
Electrical Section Or Subsection — A length or part of overhead traction wiring equipment which may be isolated from all other lengths of overhead line equipment by the operation of overhead line isolators.
Electrical Shunt — A by-path introduced into an electric circuit.
Electrical System Operator —  The person responsible for managing the Network electrical system and authorising the removal and restoration of overhead supply.
Electrified Area — Any section of track equipped with overhead line equipment, or any substation or supply substation used to provide power for electric trains.
Electro-magnetic Interference (EMI) — (Regional, AU) The signalling electrical system requires to be protected against and have immunity to electrical interference in its operating environment and is required to not generate electrical interference that adversely affects other important systems in its environment. This is called electromagnetic compatibility. Electromagnetic interference includes radiated interference due to magnetic induction, capacitive coupling and radio transmissions.
Electro-mechanical Interlocking — (Regional, AU) An interlocking area with an interlocking machine controlling both power and mechanically operated signalling field equipment.
Electro-mechanical Repeater — Repeater, the indications of which are given by one or more arms (or needles) operated by electric current.
Electro-oneumatic Signal Box — A signal box from which the operation of apparatus is effected by means of electric circuits controlling pneumatic motors.
Electrolysis Bond — (Regional, AU) A device for electrically connecting a buried utility service (pipeline or cable) to adjacent DC traction return rails, to prevent electrolysis damage to the service by stray traction currents. The electrolysis bond incorporates equipment for the control of magnitude and direction of current flowing between the buried service and traction rails.
Electronic Authority System — A generic term for systems of Safeworking that use electronic assistance in preparation and in some cases delivery of Authorities.
Electronic Token — (Regional, AU) An electronic message transmitted by radio between a signal box and train. It performs the function of a token but no physical token is required.
Electronic Train Order (ETO) — (Regional, AU) The electronic or computer-based processing, transmission, and/or displaying of a Train Order.
Electronic Train Order Working (ETOW) — System of safeworking where train movements are governed by electronic train orders that are generated by a train controller using electronic or computer-based decision support tools.
Electronic Train Order Working (ETOW) Territory — The portions of line where the Electronic Train Order system of Safeworking is used.
Electronically Assisted Train Order (EATO) —  Train orders transmitted electronically to train crews.
Electromagnetic Compatibility – The ability of an equipment or system to function satisfactorily in its electromagnetic environment without introducing intolerable electromagnetic disturbances to anything in that environment. — Electromagnetic Compatibility – The ability of an equipment or system to function satisfactorily in its electromagnetic environment without introducing intolerable electromagnetic disturbances to anything in that environment.
EMC —  Abbreviation for 'electromagnetic compatibility'.
Emergency — Incident requiring urgent action. The incident might involve death or serious injury, health or safety effects, significant damage to property or infrastructure.
Emergency Alarm — (Regional, AU) A direct communication channel to alert a signaller in an adjacent signalling centre to an emergency, provided in track circuit block territory as a replacement for emergency bell communication.
Emergency Brake Application — Maximum brake application made when a train must be stopped in the minimum distance possible, initiated by the driver or other crew member, or by a fault in the brake system such as rupture to the brake pipe, air hoses becoming disconnected, etc.
Emergency Braking Distance — (Regional, AU) The distance in which a train is capable of stopping in an emergency. Dependent upon train speed, train type, braking characteristics, train weight and/or gradient.
Emergency Emergency Contactor — (Regional, AU) A contactor which changes over the load on a power supply to the emergency standby supply when the normal power supplies fails and changes it back when the normal power supply is restored.
Emergency Exit — A supplementary means of escape from a compartment, other than by the normal access doors.
Emergency Indicator — (Regional, AU) A lineside sign that informs the driver of an emergency speed restriction ahead.
Emergency Isolation — A de-energising of part or the whole of the overhead traction line equipment in an emergency.
Emergency Lighting — Lighting powered from a separate source (eg. battery) to the vehicle’s main power source, providing illumination for evacuation purposes.
Emergency Manual Release — (Regional, AU) A bypassing of the safeguards built into an interlocking. Some failures of equipment within the interlocking will prevent the signalling of trains. Under certain controlled conditions and prescribed procedures it is sometimes acceptable for the safeguard to be momentarily bypassed to allow the signalling to be operated.
Emergency Release — (Regional, AU) A device, usually sealed, to permit the operation of a signalling function in case of emergency or failure.
Emergency Release Key — (Regional, AU) Keys that when removed from their emergency release lock hold protecting signals at stop and permit the emergency operation of points.
Emergency Release Lock — (Regional, AU) Equipment which is interlocked with protecting signals and holds an emergency release key used to release points in an emergency.
Emergency Replacement Switch —  Related Term: Replacement Switch and 'emergency signals on control'. Refer to: Replacement Switch.
Emergency Roof Entrance — A roof hatch or an area identified on the roof exterior for emergency services to cut through to gain access the rollingstock interior.
Emergency Services Organisation — (Other) Refer to the Rail Safety National Law for definition.
Energency Signals On Control (ESOC) — (Regional, AU) Provided (generally in areas controlled by CBI) to replace all signals to danger in an area controlled by an interlocking, either: 1. in response to a traffic emergency, or 2. where the interlocking fails to respond to commands.
Emergency Speed Restriction — (Regional, AU) A temporary speed restriction not shown in the weekly operating notice, or which is more restrictive than shown, or which applies at a time not shown.
Emergency Switch Machine Lock (ESML) — (Regional, AU) Equipment which is interlocked with protecting signals and the controlling mechanisms of power operated points so that the points can be manually operated when required in an emergency.
Emergency Switch Machine Lock Key — (Regional, AU) Key held in the signal box to unlock emergency equipment cupboard housing ESML handle.
EMI —  Abbreviation for 'electromagnetic interference'.
EMU —  Abbreviation for 'electric multiple unit', a multiple-unit passenger train in which the propulsion power is provided by electric power supplied from an external source such as overhead wires.
EN —  Abbreviated term for 'Euronorm', or 'European Standard'.
End Batter (rail) — A permanent plastic deformation of a rail end at a joint resulting from wheel impacts.
End Of Train Detector — (Regional, AU) A receiver mounted in the track which detects the passing of a transmitter (end-of-train-marker) mounted on the end of a train. On non track circuited lines, can be used at turnout clearance points to provide an indication to the signalling system that a train is in clear.
End Post —  Related Term: Insulation End Post. Refer to: Insulation End Post.
End Throw — The curve throw towards the outside of a horizontal curve at the vehicle end which is the position of maximum outwards curve throw for a uniform vehicle.
End-of-train Marker — A device, including tail lights, fitted to the trailing end of the last vehicle of a rail traffic consist to indicate the end of the consist.
End-of-train Monitor — A device secured to the coupler of the last vehicle which communicates via radio link to the locomotive and provides real time end-of-train air pressure and other related information.
Energise — To provide an electrically operated device with its operating current or voltage.
Engineering Token — (Overseas) A type of electronic token that gives engineering staff possession of the line.
Enhanced Permissible Speed (EPS) — (Regional, AU) The permitted speed (higher than permissible speed) that applies to a specific type of train over a section of line.
Entrance - Exit (NX) — (Regional, AU) A type of route control system of interlocking whereby the signaller operates one pushbutton at the commencement (entrance) of the required route and a second at the finish (exit) of the route. This action initiates the setting of all points required by the route.
Entrance-exit Free Lever Signal Box — (Regional, AU) Free lever signal box in which the control of a route is effected by joint operation of two levers corresponding to the extremities of the route.
EP —  Electro Pneumatic.
EP Points Indication Box — (Regional, AU) Contacts within a box mounted on track between the point switches and activated by the facing point lock plunger lock slide on facing points with an electro-pneumatic (EP) point operating mechanism. The contacts verify the position of the plunger.
EP Points Plunger Lock — (Regional, AU) An electrically operated lock which locks the facing point lock plunger lock slide on a set of electro-pneumatic (EP) operated facing points to prevent unlocking of the points except as required and provided critical track locking is not against the movement of the points.
EPS —  Enhanced Permissible Speed.
Equilibrium Cant — A train travelling at an intermediate speed such that the outward centrifugal force is exactly balanced by the effect of the inward applied cant is said to be at Balance Speed or Equilibrium Cant. In this situation there is no net lateral force on the train as the forces inwards and outwards on the curve are balanced.
ERTMS —  Abbreviated term for 'European Rail Traffic Management System'.
ESML —  Emergency Switch Machine Lock.
ESOC —  Emergency Signals on Control.
ETCS — (Overseas) European Train Control System.
ETOW — Electronic Train Order Working.
European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) — (Regional, AU) A system for managing rail traffic, enabling it to operate on compatible signalling systems across European borders.
European Train Control System (ETCS) — (Regional, AU) A three level, unified, modular automatic train protection specification to enhance interoperability across Europe.
Evaluator Equipment — (Regional, AU) Computing equipment provided to compare the outputs from the counting heads located at the extremities of an axle counter section.
Event Recorder — A device installed on rolling stock capable of recording multiple input parameters, in digital or analogue format, related to the operation of the rolling stock. Also known as a 'data logger' or 'data recorder'.
EVMC —  Electronic Vehicle Maintenance Centre.
Exclusion Zone — An exclusion zone is a safety envelope around an overhead electric line. No part of a worker, operating plant or vehicle should enter an exclusion zone while the overhead electric line is energised (live). Exclusion zones keep people, operating plant and vehicles a safe distance from energised overhead lines. An exclusion zone, for a person, operating plant or vehicle for an overhead electric line, means the distance from the line stated for the person, plant or vehicle. Exclusion zones extend in all directions, not just sideways. The exclusion zone will vary depending on the: - voltage of the line - whether the line is insulated or bare - the level of competence, training and authorisation of the person carrying out the work.
Exclusive Occupancy — Sole occupancy of track within defined limits.
Exit Signal — (Regional, AU) The signal or buffer stop/board to which a train traversing a route is directed.
Expansion — The lengthening or rails under the influence of rising temperatures.
Expansion Switches — A crossingwork assembly which allows relative longitudinal movement between consecutive rails on the same leg while also providing continuous vertical support for wheels.
Extendable — A container which can be extended to accommodate long freight such as structural steel.
Fabricated Crossing — A crossing manufactured from machined and set rails separated by blocks and suitably fastened as a unit.
Facing (direction) — The direction of rail traffic over points where the train meets the toe of the switch rail first.
Facing Movement — A wheel set movement through a set of points from the toe end to the heel end i.e. a movement of a train over points which are facing points for the direction in which the train is moving.
Facing Point Lock (economical) — (Regional, AU) A facing point lock mechanically operated by the same lever that operates the point switches (as distinct from a facing point lock operated by a separate lever).
Facing Point Lock (FPL) — (Regional, AU) A mechanical means of physically locking points so they cannot be moved, may be provided independently or incorporated in a point machine.
Facing Point Lock Bar — (Regional, AU) A lifting bar to prevent the unlocking of facing points while a train is passing over them.
Facing Point Lock Test — (Regional, AU) A test generally carried out by inserting an obstruction gauge between the stockrail and the closing switch of facing points to confirm that the facing point lock of the point operating mechanism cannot complete its operation and to confirm that the points detection indicates that the points are not safe for the passage of trains.
Facing Points — Points with the points blade facing approaching rail traffic.
Fall-safe — The capability of an item or a system to ensure that any failure in a predictable or specified mode will result only in that item or system reaching and remaining in a safe condition.
Failure Mode And Effects Analysis (FMEA) — A procedure by which potential failure modes in a technical system are analysed. An FMEA can be extended to perform what is called failure modes, effects and critical analysis (FMECA). In a FMECA, each failure mode identified is ranked according to the combined influence of its likelihood of occurrence and the severity of its consequences.
False Clear — (Non-preferred) A condition where a train detection section indicates the line is unoccupied when it is occupied by a train.
False Proceed — (Non-preferred) A proceed authority issued in unsafe or potentially unsafe conditions.
Fastening, Rail Fastening, Joint Fastening — This definition is for rail fastenings, of which there are two main types: Rail fastening; A combination of baselates and fasteners used to attach the rail to the bearer that may include spikes, pads, clips, insulators and anchors or proprietary fastening systems such as Pandrol and Rex; or Joint fastening; The fishplates and fastenings utilised to join rails together.
Fatigue — The term fatigue could refer to either: 1. Fatigue of a worker from bodily or mental exertion; or 2. Fatigue of a material that is the weakening of material subjected to stress.
Fault Tree Analysis — A systems engineering method for representing the logical combinations of various system states and possible causes which can contribute to a specified event (called the top event).
FDM —  Frequency Division Multiplex.
Feeder — A transmission line conductor or cable in the electrical power system.
Feeder Station — A building containing electrical equipment to which the traction power supplies from the electricity authority are brought, and from which the overhead line system is fed.
Female Half (crossing) —  Related Term: Nose Rail. Refer to: Nose Rail.
Fender Vehicle — A vehicle placed next to a loaded vehicle to provide additional protection or clearance for extended loads or dangerous goods.
Fibre-optic Indicator — (Regional, AU) An indicator using optical fibres to provide the required illuminated indication. Uses include standard and miniature alphanumeric route indicators, close doors, right away and off indicators.
Fibre-optic Signal — (Regional, AU) A colour light signal that uses fibre-optic technology to combine the red, yellow and green aspects into one aperture to generate the appropriate aspect. Other uses include banner and position light signals.
Field Blocking — (Regional, AU) Vital blocking which makes use of a vital relay located at the controlled point or remote controlled interlocking.
Field Lubricated Bearings — Bearings that require lubricant to be added during the service period.
Field Side Of Rail — The side of the rail opposite the gauge face.
Field Welding — (Legacy) The welding of rails in, or beside the track by any welding process.
First Caution — (Regional, AU) A signal which gives the driver the first indication of a need to stop at a signal ahead.
First Wheel Replacement — (Regional, AU) A control applied to a signal which replaces it to its most restrictive aspect immediately after the front of the train has passed that signal.
Fishbolt — An oval neck bolt used for fastening fish plates (with oval holes) at joints.
Fishing Angle — The slope of the underside of the head or top side of the flange of the rail.
Fishing Face — The sloped face under the head or on top of the flange of the rail.
Fishplate — A steel component normally used in pairs for the purpose of joining rail ends together.
Fishplate Bond — (Regional, AU) Provided to ensure electrical continuity between two rails mechanically connected.
Fishplates, Junction — Fishplates designed to provide connection and support to rails of different sections.
Fishplates, Weld Repair — Fishplates designed to provide clearance at rail welds. These fish plates are utilised at defective or suspect welds to provide rail joining in the event of a weld failure.
Fit For Purpose — Able to be used for the required function.
Five Foot — (Legacy) A term used to identify the area between the rails of broad gauge track.
Fixed Block — (Regional, AU) A train separation system based on the segmentation of the track into a series of blocks. It is intended that a space consisting of one or more blocks is to exist between trains.
Fixed Distant Signal — (Regional, AU) A distant signal that is only capable of displaying a caution.
Fixed Heel Points — (Regional, AU) Points which utilise permanently fastened heel blocks. Localised flexing of the switch occurs ahead of the fixed heel and the switch rail continues beyond the heel.
Fixed Nose Vee — A vee where the nose of the vee is fixed. Most conventional vees are fixed nose.
Fixed Point — A point or location in the track where the rail is fixed and cannot move longitudinally relative to the sleepers and ballast. This may include such locations as turnouts, level crossings and transition points from dog spiked timber sleepered track to resilient fastened concrete sleepered track.
Fixed Worksite — A worksite with boundaries that are fixed and defined for the duration of the work.
Flag Attendant — (Regional, AU) A person appointed to exhibit hand signals.
Flangeway — Gap between the running edge of the rail and any adjacent rail or feature which restricts the available movement of the wheel flange.
Flangeway Points — The gap between the back of the open switch and the running face of the stockrail to allow passage of the wheel flange.
Flangeway Width — The distance between the running and guarding surfaces of crossingwork or crossingwork assembly.
Flank Points — (Regional, AU) Points which, if traversed by an overrunning train in the facing direction, could direct that train away from a route or overlap that has been set for an authorised train movement.
Flank Protection — (Regional, AU) Protection from overrunning movements approaching on converging tracks, usually by additional point interlocking or train detection.
Flare — The tapering widening at the ends of the flangeways to gradually engage wheel flanges and position them to pass through flangeways.
Flash Butt Weld — The fusion welding of rail ends by electric arc heating and contact under high pressure.
Flasher Relay — (Regional, AU) A relay so designed that, when energised, its contacts open and close at pre-determined intervals. Flasher relay contacts may be mechanical or electronic.
Flashing Beacon — Rotating beacon light or strobe light.
Flashing Double Yellow (aspect) — (Overseas) Displayed by a colour light signal, informs the driver to expect the next main signal at flashing single yellow.
Flashing Single Yellow (aspect) — (Regional, AU) A preliminary caution displayed by a colour light signal informing the driver to expect the next main signal at single yellow with junction indicator set for a diverging route.
Flat — (Non-preferred) Term could be abbreviation for either: 1. Flat-rack or platform base container; or 2. Flat wagon - a wagon with a full width substantially flat deck, without side walls and with or without stanchions, bulkheads and other load support and restraint systems. Without container securing devices, used for general purpose freight carriage.
Flat Spot — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Flat Wheel. Refer to: Flat Wheel.
Flat Wheel — Loss of roundness of the tread of a wheel usually caused by wheelslip or wheel slide.
Flat Wheel Detector — Detects the presence of a flattened wheel surface on a passing train by detecting the vibration produced by the impact occurring as the flat portion comes into contact with the rail surface at each revolution of the wheel. Also known as a 'wheel impact detector'.
Fleeting Mode — (Regional, AU) A controlled automatic signal operating as an automatic signal is said to be operating in Fleeting Mode.
Flexible Switch — (Regional, AU) A continuous point switch that is 'heel-less'; with the heel block bolted solidly through the switch.
FMEA —  Failure Mode and Effects Analysis.
Focusing — (Regional, AU) Alignment of a signal to provide train drivers with acceptable sighting of signal indications.
Fog Signal — (Legacy) refer Railway Track Signal.
Foot — The base or foot of the rail.
Foot Crossing — (Non-preferred) Related Term: Pedestrian Crossing. Refer to: Pedestrian Crossing.
Forced Drop Lock — An electric lock in which the locking member is mechanically forced down to the locked position.
Formation — The full width of the top of embankments or the bottom of cuttings upon which the track is constructed.
Foul — In a position to obstruct rail traffic on an adjacent line.
Foul Ballast — Ballast that is contaminated by mud or similar material.
Fouling Bar — (Regional, AU) A mechanically operated form of train detection activated by the flange of a wheel.
Fouling Point — (Non-preferred) The position on a siding or secondary track beyond which a vehicle will foul the structure gauge of the main track.
Fouling Track Circuit — (Regional, AU) A track circuit near where lines converge or cross and where a train (including the overhang of the train) on the track circuit could be within the clearance point with other lines.
Four Aspect Signalling — (Overseas) A system of colour light signalling which provides red, yellow, double yellow and green aspects in a manner which normally provides a first caution at least two signals before a signal at red.
FPL —  Facing Point Lock.
Free Curving — Condition where only the leading wheelset of a bogie or rigid vehicle wheelbase is in flange contact in a curve.
Free Welding — Welding without the use of a rail tensor. It is most commonly the joining of short rails into long rail strings before destressing.
Free-wired Interlocking — (Regional, AU) A relay interlocking that comprises individually wired relays rather than prewired sets.
Freight Rolling Stock — Hauled rolling stock used to transport goods, materials, etc.
Frequency Division Multiplex (FDM) — (Regional, AU) A data transmission system that uses unique frequencies to separate channels over a single pair of conductors.
Frequency Shift Key (FSK) —  Abbreviation for ‘frequency shift key’.
Fringe Signal Box — (Overseas) The first signal box located along a line beyond the boundary of a controlled area.
Frog —  Related Term: Crossing. Refer to: Crossing.
Front Contact — (Regional, AU) That contact of a relay which is closed (made) only when the relay is energised (picked-up).
Front Rod — (Regional, AU) The bar or rod connecting the point switches to which the drive is coupled.
FSK —  Frequency Shift Key.
Fulfil — To complete the instructions on, and associated activities for, an Occupancy Authority.
Full Continuity Test (FC) — An air brake examination that confirms the train crew has control of the train by testing that there is brake pipe pressure throughout the train.
Full Overlap — (Regional, AU) An overlap of at least 180 m (or 400 m where both the stop signal and the preceding caution signal are both semaphore signals).
Full Service Brake Application — A full brake application in the normal operating mode, without using the emergency position.
Full Train Examination (FXI) — Performed by examining staff after final marshalling of non tested loading, prior to commencement of journey consisting of: full mechanical examination; complete air brake test; brake pipe leakage test; (part of air brake test) issue of a train examiners certificate for interstate freight trains.
Full Train Examination (FX2) — Performed by rail traffic crew when examining staff are unavailable after final marshalling and attachment of locomotive to non tested loading, prior to commencement of journey consisting of: - general mechanical examination; - complete train air brake test.
Full Train Inspection (FX) — (Regional, AU) An examination which checks the mechanical condition of all vehicles in the train, confirms the security of all loads and equipment on the train, and confirms the correct operation of the braking system throughout the train. It also identifies any vehicles on the train with non-functioning brakes, and checks the make up of the train and confirms that it is consistent with safe and efficient operations of the train.
Function Test To Control Tables — (Regional, AU) This is the operation of the equipment from the control panel, keyboard, levers, switches, or VDU (Visual Display Unit) to verify that the system operates safely in accordance with the electrical interlocking and controls incorporated in the design drawings, namely the control tables.
Functional Safety — (Regional, AU) The capacity of a safeworking system to maintain safe train operation with protection against unsafe outcomes due to failure of: - system software - system hardware - signaller-driver communication - signaller analysis or decision making - driver comprehension, judgement or response.
Ganger — (Legacy) Term for person responsible for maintenance of a section of track.
Gangway — The intercar walking surface provided between adjoining passenger vehicles.
Gantry — A signal structure spanning one or more tracks and having two or more points of support.
Gantry Crane — An overhead crane spanning one or more rail tracks and roadway to allow transfer of loading from a road vehicle, or a rail wagon, to another wagon. The crane may be either running on its own rails or be rubber tyred to allow it to move around a terminal. Often referred to as RTG (rubber tyred gantry) or straddle crane.
Gauge (track) — The distance between the inside running (or gauge) faces of the two rails, measured between points 16 mm below the top of the rail heads.
Gauge Conversion — The process of changing the track gauge from one gauge to another, e.g. broad gauge to standard gauge.
Gauge Corner — Transition surface separating the rail running surface from the rail side.
Gauge Face — The inner side of the running rail head, i.e. the side of the rail head where the track gauge is measured and could be contact by the wheel flange.
Gauge Face Angle — The angle between a line perpendicular to the sleeper plane (i.e. the plane of the track) and the line tangent to the rail gauge face where wheel flange contact occurs.
Gauge Indicator — (Regional, AU) Gauge indicators are a special form of signalling route indicators which indicate to the driver on a dual gauge track, which gauge of track he is being signalled towards.
Gauge Point — The point on the side of the rail head 16mm beneath the top surface of the rail at which track gauge is measured.
Gauge Side (track) — The side of the rail within the track gauge.
Gauge Width — The distance between the guarding face of a guard rail and running edge of a running rail, measured across the track at right angles to the running edge.
Gauge-overlap — A section of track where the two lines of track overlap so that one rail of each track is within the rail gauge of the other.
GCP —  Abbreviated term for ‘grade crossing predictor’, a microprocessor-controlled system that is deployed to continually monitor the approach to level crossings. It applies a constant a.c. signal to the track and measures the level of the resulting voltage. This varies with the approaching train which alters the track impedance. The voltage and its rate of change are used to determine the train speed, train arrival time and to activate the crossing protection equipment at the appropriate time.
General Inspection — Essentially visual inspections but may include some elementary site testing and measurement. They should include the requirements of a patrol inspection in addition to inspection of all readily visible elements of the infrastructure and elements known to contain critical defects.
General Purpose Flat Wagon — A wagon with a full width substantially flat deck, without side walls and with or without stanchions, bulkheads and other load support and restraint systems.
General Train Examination — An examination conducted by appropriately qualified employees (normally locomotive drivers) at those times and locations where other staff qualified to conduct a Full Train Inspection inspection are not available.
Geographical Interlocking —  Related Term: Free-wired interlocking. Refer to: Free-wired interlocking.
Geographical Panel — Control panel reproducing schematically the position of the tracks and the aspects of signals etc., with their respective control switches or buttons.
Glued Insulated Joint — An insulated rail joint in which the rails, fishplates and components are glued.
Gold Flashed Contact — (Regional, AU) Contact surfaces treated with a thin film of gold to provide a reliable, low resistance, clean electrical contact, particularly in low voltage circuits.
Goods Line — (Regional, AU) A running line that is not required to be signalled to the standard required for passenger trains.
GPL —  Abbreviated term for 'ground position light signal'.
Grabrail — A short rail that is generally placed in a horizontal or vertical orientation to steady or assist a person carrying out a movement or action.
Grade — The rate of slope of the surface of the track in the direction of its length.
Grade Control Device — A wagon fitting which slows the release of the brakes. It has three positions: EX for 'exhaust' which means the brakes are operating normally, IP which is an intermediate delay position and HP which is maximum delay.
Grade Separation — The crossing of a track by another track, roadway or pedestrian pathway by an underbridge or overbridge, rather than crossing at the same elevation.
Gradient — A measure of the rate at which the railway is inclined (rising or falling). Gradients are signed +ve (rising) or -ve (falling) in respect of the direction of travel.
Grading Rings — Buried earth electrode system which encircles the structure to be protected. The purpose of the grading ring is to prevent the rise of hazardous step and touch voltage potentials.
Graduated Cant Plate — A plate under the rail which changes rail cant from 1:20 on open track to zero cant at crossing work over 3 adjacent timbers. They are marked A (1:30), B (1:40) or C (1:80) to indicate the cant.
Green (aspect) — (Regional, AU) Displayed by a colour light signal, indicates to the driver that, in three or four aspect signalling, the next signal will be displaying a proceed aspect. Also see Two Position / Two Aspect Signalling.
Green Card —  Refer to ‘defect card’.
Groove — (Regional, AU) The flangeway gap between the running edge and check of a tramway rail, crossing or installation.
Groove, Deep (crossing Design) — Crossingwork design with a sufficiently deep flangeway depth which ensures wheel tread contact with the running surface in the wheel transfer area.
Groove, Shallow (crossing Design) — Crossingwork design with a shallow flangeway depth which provides for wheel flange bearing and thus no contact of the wheel tread with the normal running surface.
Gross Mass — Nominal total mass of rolling stock including maximum payload, provisioning, maximum service capacity of crew and passengers and wheels at nominal new diameter.
Gross Tonne Kilometre — (Regional, AU) Gross tonne kilometres is a measure calculated by multiplying the gross weight of a train (ie the weight of the locomotives and wagons plus the payload) by the distance travelled.
Ground Fault Detector — A detector similar to a slip detector but installed vertically to detect vertical displacement of the ground, including ground heave due to related ground movement.
Ground Frame — A small track side interlocking machine used for manual points operation.
Ground Position Light Signal (GPL) — (Regional, AU) A position light signal mounted at ground level.
Ground Shunt Signal — (Regional, AU) A shunting signal mounted at ground level.
Ground Switch Panel — (Regional, AU) A ground frame which uses only switches and/or buttons as operating devices.
GSM-R — (Regional, AU) Global system for mobile communications - railways.
Guaranteed Power Supply —  See Secure Power Supply.
Guard — A qualified worker on a passenger train who carries out safeworking duties and is responsible for the safety and supervision of passengers. Where required, the guard assists the driver in the management of the train and its associated equipment.
Guard Edge — The side of the guard rail head which makes contact with the backs of the wheels.
Guard Rail — A rail (inside or outside the running rail) used to restrain lateral movement of a derailed wheelset. Used to protect structures or control the lateral movement of the wheelset on bridges or in other higher risk situations.
Guardrail — A rail or series of rails acting as an obstacle or barrier to a person falling from an elevated position, or to moving to a position of danger. A guardrail may also serve as a single or multiple handrail.
Guards Indicator — (Regional, AU) A lunar white light in a case inscribed Guards indicator' provided on the platform which, when illuminated, indicates to the guard of a train that the signal at the departure end of the platform is showing a proceed indication.
Guards Keys — (Regional, AU) Interlocking keys, with bow handles, for securing interlocking frames at intermediate sidings on double lines.
GWA — The Rail Infrastructure Manager for the Tarcoola to Darwin standard gauge network.
HABD —  Hot Axle Box Detector.
Half-staff — A metal staff located at the ends of a section, and interlocked with signals' circuits. Also known as half-pilot-staff. Two half staffs can be joined to provide a pilot staff for the section.
Hand (points) — Term used to denote the turnout direction of points.
Hand Brake —  A mechanical device used to secure a rail vehicle against movement. Can also include spring parking brakes.
Hand Points — (Legacy) Points not interlocked and worked manually by an independent lever adjacent to the points.
Hand Signal — A signal given by hand movements, with or without a flag or light. To give a signal by hand.
Handhold — A locally placed support at a change of level or direction, or where people are required to stand or wait, to stabilize themselves against the motion of the train.
Handrail — A rail which runs parallel to the access path and assists movement by allowing the hand to slide over the top, while providing support to the person, and allowing for a sudden gripping action if needed.
Handsignaller — A Competent Worker who gives handsignals to rail traffic crew.
Hardened Rail — Rolled rail that has been head-hardened or full section hardened by in-line or off-line processes.
Hardening Process — The procedure of increasing the hardness of rail or other material to improve wear characteristics. Commonly employed processes for rails are heat treatment and work hardening.
Harmonisation — the act of bringing into agreement so as to work effectively together.
Haul — To move rail traffic using a motive power source at the leading end.
Hazard — A source or a situation with a potential to harm someone (injury or illness) or damage property or the environment.
Hazard And Operability Study (HAZOP) — A structured study to identify all deviations from design intent with undesirable effects on safety or operability.
Hazard Identification — The process of recognising that a hazard exists and defining its characteristics.
Hazard Light — Amber or orange flashing light fitted to a vehicle to provide warning.
hazard trees — Fault based diagrams showing infrastructure and rolling stock related hazards.
HAZID —  Abbreviated term for Hazard Identification.
HAZOP —  Abbreviated term for 'hazard and operability study'.
Head — That part of the rail which provides a running and guiding surface for the wheel.
Head-hardened Rail — Rolled rail in which the head has a hardened zone extending inwards from its top and side surfaces.
Headlamp — Lamp that forms part of a headlight.
Headlight — Main bright light(s) on the front of rolling stock.
Headlights — White or blue lights fitted at the front of rail traffic to provide visibility for the rail traffic crew and to improve the visibility of rail traffic.
Heads Level (points) — The position on a half set of points at which both the switch and stock rail top running surfaces are at the same level. It corresponds to the commencement of switch head top machining.
Headway — The distance or time between two or more trains needing to use the same section of the track, either in the same or opposite directions.
Heat Number — Markings on the centreline of the web of the rail in depressed numerals and letters. It indicates the cast, ingot and portion of ingot from which the rail was made. The heat number is repeated several times on a standard rail length and is on the opposite side of the web from the Rolling Brand. Quality assurance records include the rail Heat Number and permit the chemistry of the rail to be traced.
Heat Treatment — A heating and quenching process used to increase the hardness of rails or steel components. The most common processes are furnace heating and oil/water quenching and flame heating and air quenching.
Heavy Haul — (Legacy) The term for transportation by rail of bulk commodities.
Heady Track Equipment — Track maintenance machines or items of equipment which under normal conditions cannot be removed from the track manually by two workers. A road-rail vehicle that can only be removed from track at locations such as level crossings or machinery used where thetmit welding is undertaken is regarded as heavy track equipment.
Heel — The end of points about which the switch pivots.
Heel Block — The block at the heel end of points about which the switch pivots.
Heel Less Points —  Related Term: Fixed Heel Points. Refer to: Fixed Heel Points.
Heel Mechanism — (Regional, AU) The mechanism which provides support pivoting at the heel of a tramway switch.
Helper Engines — (Legacy) A locomotive not assigned to a train for the whole journey. These units are normally marshalled in with the power consist under the control of the train crew but may, at times, be utilised as manned helpers at the rear, or anywhere within the train consist, to assist in moving a train over a ruling grade.
Heritage Rolling Stock — Rolling stock preserved or restored for its historical value.
High Risk Failure — (Overseas) A wrong side failure where no other part of the signalling system provides protection. Also known as an ‘unprotected wrong side failure’.
High Voltage Impulse Track Circuit — (Regional, AU) A track circuit fed by high voltage pulses of particular shape and size which are recognised by a receiver and special track relay.
High-rail Vehicle — (Regional, AU) A vehicle that is capable of running on both road and rail. Often these are standard road vehicles that have a pair of flanged rail wheels on the front and rear. Generally the vehicle accesses the rail via a level crossing, lowers the rail wheels onto the rails which will guide the vehicle without the need to steer, and is propelled by the road wheels that are in contact with the rails. High-rail equipment is fitted to inspection, personnel carrying vehicles and some track construction and maintenance machines.
High-wide Load Detector — (Regional, AU) A device capable of detecting excessive heights or widths on a passing train with respect to accepted track structure clearances.
Hold Clear — (Regional, AU) A term used to designate a device for holding a signal in any position other than its most restrictive.
Holding Test — (Regional, AU) An air brake examination to check that the brakes on the last three vehicles of a train will remain applied for a predetermined time in the event of a break-away.
Holding Track — (Regional, AU) A track where vehicles are held, within a terminal, awaiting allocation orders.
Home Signal Or Starting Signal — (Regional, AU) A controlled signal which directly protects points, level crossings, or other permanent risks. When cleared, this signal also gives the driver authority to enter the section provided that, where required, the driver is in possession of the authority for the section.
Hood — (Regional, AU) A cover placed above individual aspects of a colour light signal or route indicator to reduce phantom aspects due to sunlight. Where necessary, long hoods may be used.
Hopper Wagon — A wagon with the floor and/or walls sloping from the sides and ends to one or more discharge points or hoppers. Hopper wagons may have open or covered tops and incorporate one or more of: (a) bottom doors (sliding or swing) for gravity discharge; (b) equipment for pneumatic pressure discharge; (c) equipment for vacuum discharge.
Horizontal Alignment —  Related Term: Alignment. Refer to: Alignment.
Horsepower — A unit of measurement to gauge the output of a locomotive that is then used to calculate the tonnage of loading that the locomotive can pull over a particular section of track. Now referred to in kilowatts.
Hot Axle Box Detector (HABD) — Wayside or train mounted system used to detect suspected defective axle bearings that are abnormally hot.
Hot Box — (Legacy) An overheated axle bearing on either a locomotive or wagon.
Hot Standby — (Regional, AU) Form of redundancy in which the 'spare' or secondary equipment is continuously operating and generating output simultaneously with the primary equipment. Results in no discernible interruption to system function on failure of the primary unit.
Hot Strip (in Signal Lens) — (Regional, AU) Popular name for 'close viewing sector'.
Hot Wheel Detector — (Regional, AU) A device capable of detecting abnormal heating in wheels on passing trains.
Housed Switch — (Regional, AU) A point switch which has a guide placed alongside it (and over it when in the open position), the purpose of which is to hold wheel flanges away from the tip of the opposite switch and/or away from a joggle in the stockrail.
HREOC —  Abbreviated term for 'Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission'.
Huck Bolts —  Trade name for 'swagelok'.
Human Factors — The scientific discipline that is concerned with the application of information about human characteristics, capacities, and limitations to the design of human tasks, machines, machine systems, and environments.
Hunting — Uncontrolled and undesirable cyclic lateral and yaw displacements of the wheelsets of a vehicle, generally worsening with increasing speed.
Hydro-pneumatic Points — (Regional, AU) Alternative term for 'train operated points'.
IBJ —  Abbreviated term for Insulated Block Joint.
IECC —  Integrated Electronic Control Centre.
IFS —  Individual Function Switch.
Illegal Signal Indication — A signal indication that is inconsistent with the signal aspects and indications used on the network, or the indications of adjoining signals and the known condition of the line, or what is known about occupancy of the line. Related Term: Wrong Side Failure. Refer to: Wrong Side Failure.
Illuminated — The internal or external illumination of signalling equipment.
Illuminated Diagram — A signal-box diagram giving, by means of illumination, automatic indications of the occupancy or otherwise of the tracks within the controlled and/or adjoining areas. It may also include the automatic indication of the signal aspects and/or positions and the positions of points, etc.
ILWS — Inductive Loop Warning System 
Impact Analysis — Process for analysing where the specifics of a proposed change impact on rail safety taking into account the accredited rail organisations risk register, safety performance and accident/incident register.
Impedance Bond, Neutral Leads — Cables connecting the mid-point of an impedance bond in one track circuit to the mid-point of an impedance bond on the adjoining track circuit or to the traction rail of an adjoining single rail track circuit. (Regional, AU)
Impedance Bond, Side Leads — Cables each side of the impedance bond connecting the bond to the adjacent rails of the track circuit. (Regional, AU)
Impedence Bond — A trackside mounted device, connected across running rails, which will allow a free flow of traction current between traction return rails and provide a connection for earthing the traction return rails and rail side structures without introducing any imbalance in the signalling track circuits.
In Advance — A position along the line ahead of a given position, when facing the direction a train travels on the line. The area through which a train travels after passing a given position.
In Clear — A train is In Clear when it is within the clearance point boards for crossing purposes, or when the entire train is within station protection and is not foul of an adjacent track.
In Effect — Activate, become current, in force.
In Rear — A position along the line behind a given position, when facing the direction a train travels on the line. The area through which a train has travelled before reaching a given position. (Regional, AU)
In-bearer Points Mechanism — An arrangement of points in which the drive and detection connections are located within purpose-built hollow bearers, rather than in the spaces between bearers. The drive mechanism and detector may also be housed in the bearers. (Regional, AU)
In-cab Signalling — A display in the driving cab of a train, showing permissible speed or extent of movement authority, instead of or supplementing lineside signals.
In-field Protection — One or more devices approved by Rail Infrastructure Managers that provide warning to protect rail traffic crew and workers. The device or devices may be used in conjunction with signalling or blocking facilities.
In-sleeper Point Machine — Refer to 'in-bearer point mechanism'. 
Incident — An uncontrolled, unplanned, undesired event that under different circumstances has the potential to result in loss. Although loss has not occurred, the events leading up to an incident can be identical to an accident. An incident is commonly known as a near miss.
Incident Reporting System — The computer database system for recording and responding to incidents.
Incident Response Co-ordinator — The person or persons nominated by a rail organisation to provide 24 hour, 7 day point of contact and to provide incident response initiation within that organisation.
Independent Position Light Signal — A position light signal not associated with a main signal. (Regional, AU)
Independent Switches — Points with each point switch of the pair of point switches separately and independently interlocked and controlled. (Regional, AU)
Indication Lock — An electric lock connected to a mechanical lever of an interlocking machine to prevent the full movement and release of interlocking by the lever until the signals, points or other units operated, or directly affected by such lever, are in the proper position. (Regional, AU)
Indicator — A device used to convey information, usually visually. (Regional, AU)
Indirect Interlocking — Interlocking between two movable parts not effected directly in the system constituted by these two parts, but existing nevertheless by reason of the presence of direct interlocking between the parts in question and another part external to that system.
Indirect Opposing Route Locking — Two complete routes that are conflicting in that they require at least one set of points in a different position. However, cancellation of one route with a train part way through the route releases the locking on these points which, when they become free, create the conditions for direct opposing locking to be set. Indirect opposing locking is applied to prevent the setting of the route that has become opposing. (Regional, AU)
Individual Wheel L/V — The ratio of the lateral force to the vertical force between the wheel and rail on any individual wheel that is used as a measure for the likelihood of a vehicle to derail by flange climbing.
Infrastructure Maintenance Rolling Stock — Track machines and road-rail vehicles. Also known as on 'track vehicles'.
Inhibit — To avoid/suppress the initiation of a driver supervisory system brake application. (Non-preferred)
Insert (sleeper) — One or more of the fastening components that is cast in the sleeper at the time of manufacture.
Instruction Sign — A sign, near or fixed to a signal, bearing directions to rail traffic crews.
Instrumented Wheelset — An item of test equipment which includes a wheelset equipped with strain gauges and processing electronics such that the lateral and vertical forces between each wheel and rail can be measured while the rolling stock is in motion.
Insulated Block Joint — A joint in which electrical insulation is provided between adjoining rails. Assembled from insulating end posts, ferrules and side pieces or manufactured as a glued insulated joint. (Regional, AU)
Insulated Overlap Span — An overlap span arranged with insulation between the two sections of overhead line equipment so that by the opening of an isolator or by the removal of connections, one section may be electrically separated from the other.
Insulated Rail Joint (IRJ) — A rail joint manufactured from components and assembled such that the joined rails are electrically insulated from each other.
Insulated Section — Stretch of track one or each rail of which is insulated.
Insulating Ferrule — In insulated joints with metal fishplates, ferrules provided to insulate the fishbolts.
Insulating Side Plate — In insulated joints with metal fishplates, plate provided to insulate the fishplate.
Insulation Channel — A preformed channel manufactured from insulating material which is installed between the rails and fishplates to provide electrical isolation between the fish plates and rails at insulated joints.
Insulation End Post — The insulating material of similar cross section to rail which is installed between rail ends to provide electrical isolation between one rail and the other at an insulated joint.
Insulation Ferrule — A tube manufactured from insulating material which is fitted to a fastener to provide electrical isolation between the fastener and the rails and or fish plates at an insulated joint.
Insulation Resistance — The electrical resistance offered by the insulation on any current-carrying part or conductor. (Regional, AU)
Insulation Test — This is a test of the resistance of the insulation between an electrical circuit conductor and 'earth' or directly between the conductors of two separate electrical circuits. The test is made at a specified voltage which is high compared to the circuit voltage. (Regional, AU)
Intact — A train is intact when all the vehicles are coupled together and the lead locomotive and the last vehicle are displaying the correct signals. (Regional, AU)
Integrated Electronic Control Centre (IECC) — A computerised signalling control centre that usually incorporates SSI and ARS. Signalling indications, train descriptions and other information are displayed on VDUs, and routes are set by tracker ball, keyboard or automatically by ARS. (Regional, AU)
Integration — the act of blending or combining into an integral whole
Interchangeability — the ability to put (each of two) things in the place of the other
Interface Coordination Plan — An agreement between parties managing an interface which sets out the responsibilities of each party.
Interim Accreditation — Related Term: Temporary Accreditation 
Interlinking — Box-to-box controls to ensure enforcement of electrical sequential locking, proving of home and distant on and berth clear before transmitting line clear and the acceptance of second train. (Regional, AU)
Interlock — Interaction of equipment controlling points and/or signals to prevent conflicting movements of signals, and to make sure routes are set correctly.
Interlocked Points — A set or series of points the control of which is interlocked with other functions of the interlocking.
Interlocking Area — An area equipped with interlocked points and/or signals.
Interlocking Automatic Coupler — An automatic coupler with a different profile on the coupler head to prevent over-riding and/or telescoping in the event of collision.
Interlocking Frame — An alternative term for Lever Frame. (Regional, AU)
Interlocking Key — A means of obtaining the effect of interlocking by the release and transfer of a captive key and without the physical connection between the items of equipment concerned. (Regional, AU)
Interlocking Machine — Equipment used to operate or control interlocked points and signals.
Intermediate — Between two others. (Regional, AU)
Intermediate Block Home Signal — A signal controlling the exit from an intermediate block section. (Regional, AU)
Intermediate Block Section — A train detected portion of line between the section signal and the intermediate block home signal, both of which are operated from the same signal box. The intermediate block section is situated between adjacent signal boxes so as to improve overall headway. (Regional, AU)
Intermediate Car — Alternative term for Intermediate Vehicle. 
Intermediate Electric Train Staff Instrument — Provided at junctions and sidings within an electric train staff section to restore the staff instruments at each end of the section to phase when a train has been admitted to the branch line or stored in a siding. The intermediate electric train staff instrument also allows a train to enter an electric train staff section from a branch line or siding. (Regional, AU)
Intermediate Siding — A siding located within a section generally used for purposes other than crossing or passing of rail traffic.
Intermediate Signal — An intermediate signal is a fixed signal used to divide a section to facilitate the movement of following rail traffic.
Intermediate Token Instrument — A mid section token instrument, usually located at a ground frame and associated with shutting-in facilities. (Regional, AU)
Intermediate Vehicle — A passenger vehicle without a drivers compartment and not intended or equipped to operate as the lead vehicle in a MUC or MCS consist. Intermediate vehicles may be powered or non-powered.
Intermodal Traffic — Freight moving via at least two different modes of transport, eg rail to road, rail to sea etc. Used to describe freight in modules which can be transported by more than one mode (rail, road, sea or air). The usual form of intermodal freight is containerised freight, which has proven to be the most convenient to transfer between modes. Because of this the terms intermodal and containerised are often interchanged.
Interoperability — A term used to mean the possibility of uninterrupted movement of trains from differing countries (states) across international (state) borders. (Regional, AU)
Interoperability Component — means any part, group of parts, subassembly or complete assembly of equipment that is incorporated or intended to be incorporated into a subsystem upon which the interoperability of the railway depends directly or indirectly.
Interrupter (track Circuit) — Device designed to break the feed current to a track circuit in certain cases (derailment of a train at catch points, etc).
Intersection Of Heads (points Or Crossings) — The position on crossingwork at which the inside of the rail head, at full section, contacts the running edge of the other rail head. It corresponds to the commencement of head side machining.
Intersection Point (IP) — The intersection point of the centre lines of two tracks, tangent from the crossing.
Interstate Standard Gauge Network — Standard gauge track, mostly under control of ARTC, connecting the mainland Australian state capital cities.
Interstate System — Any railway system or part of a railway system, designated by its owner as a route to be used for movement of interstate traffic.
IP — Intersection Point 
IPITC — Abbreviation for 'intelligent processor island track circuit'. 
IRJ — Abbreviated term for 'insulated rail joint'. 
Irregular Incident — An occurrence on a railway or tramway system that is not an accident but involves a breach of the operating rules or procedures of the system.
Irregular Signal Indications — A signal which is displaying a non-valid indication, e.g. a colour light signal which is displaying no light or an irregular combination of colour lights or irregular flashing lights, or a semaphore signal with an abnormal signal arm indication which in combination with other failures may bring the system to an unsafe condition. (Regional, AU)
Isolated — Disconnected from all possible sources of electricity supply by means of visible breaks or length of insulation of value appropriate to the voltage.
Isolated Overhead Wiring Sections — An overhead wiring section disconnected from all possible sources of supply.
Isolation — The disengagement of a system by an authorised procedure either for maintenance purposes or to enable the rolling stock to continue to operate under special conditions when the device has failed.
Isolation Protection — Measures to prevent the energisation of isolated/de-energised overhead line equipment by the passage of pantographs.
Issue — To give or send copies of authorities, warnings, notices and Network publications to affected Competent Workers by voice, hand delivery or electronic means.
ITSR — Independent Transport Regulator (NSW) 
JIS — Abbreviation for 'Japanese Industrial Standards'. (Overseas)
Joggled Stock Rail — A stockrail joggled such that a thick tipped point switch fits into the set in the stockrail, so that the running face of the switch lines up with the running face of the stockrail. With facing points the opposite point switch is frequently housed.
Joint (rail) — The location where two rails or trackwork components are connected.
Joint Hopping — Where fast-moving short vehicles pass from one track circuit to the next, the difference between the pick-up and drop-away times can cause the vehicle to momentarily be undetected. Also called Block Skip. (Regional, AU)
Joint Occupancy — Simultaneous occupancy of track within defined limits.
Jointless Track Circuit (JTC) — A track circuit which does not require insulated rail joints at its extremities. The extremities are defined by the use of electrically tuned zones. (Regional, AU)
JTC — Abbreviated term for 'jointless track circuit'. 
Jumbo — Jumbo refers to container height and specifically to those containers which are over 2.7m or 9ft in height.
Junper — A length of conductor provided with clamps for use as a temporary electrical connection to bridge across a gap, for example, in a pipe, running rail, cable sheath, and catenary system. And: An interconnecting cable between vehicles in a train to provide electrical continuity.
Junction Indicator — An indicator provided at a junction signal to inform the driver which way a junction is set, by means of a line of white lights. (Regional, AU)
Junction Joint — The connecting joint of rails of differing rail sections.
Junction Repeater Signal — A junction repeater is displayed at the signal in rear of the signal at the junction, when that signal is cleared, to inform the driver which way the junction is set. It consists of five lunar white lights inclined towards the direction the route ahead is set. Generally used to provide drivers of heavy freight trains with advance information that a route through a high speed turnout is clear. This is different from turnout repeater. (Regional, AU)
Junction Signal — A signal protecting facing points over which more than one main route is available. In colour light signalled areas, the term junction signal also applies where there are facing points ahead of the signal and the straight-ahead route is not a main signalled route, although it might appear to a driver to be an available route. (Regional, AU)
Junction Weld — A weld used to join two rails of differing sections.
Just Culture — An occurrence investigation environment which acknowledges human error and encourages honest reporting of errors whilst establishing clear accountability for errors.
K Crossing — A crossingwork comprising two opposing noses, a running wing rail and a guard wing rail. K crossings are used in diamond crossingwork assemblies.
Key Locking — The locking is transmitted from the interlocking frame (or equivalent) to the signalling function to be released by means of a key. It can be applied to ground frame points or level crossings. (Overseas)
Key Staff — A train staff or electric staff with a key fitted permanently at one end. This key operates an annett lock. (Regional, AU)
Key Switch — Special type of switch which may only be actuated by means of a special type of key.
Key Token — A type of token normally used for electric token block. (Overseas)
Kilometre Location — The distance in kilometres from a set point, used to identify a specific place in a section.
Kinematic Outline — A two-dimensional cross-section of the shape of a vehicle that consists of the static outline plus the maximum permitted allowance for vertical bounce upwards plus lateral and roll movements in response to a steady-state cant deficiency force at maximum permitted cant deficiency (or the maximum permitted installed cant) and dynamic movements in response to track irregularity.
King Lever — A lever which when operated alters the Interlocking between other levers. It is usually provided for the purpose of switching out a signal box. (Overseas)
Kink — A non-intentional sharp bend or curve in a rail. A kink indicates a defect.
Knee (crossing) — The central or narrowest part of a fabricated vee crossing at the set of wing rails.
Knuckle (rolling Stock) — The pivoting casting that fits into the coupling head and rotates about a vertical pin to either the open position (to engage a mating coupler) or to the closed position (when fully engaged).
Knuckle (track) — The central or narrowest part of a fabricated K crossing at the set of wing rails. It corresponds to the centre position between the noses of the crossing.
Lamp Proving — A system that ensures the required lamp(s) are lit, for example, by measuring the current drawn by the lamp(s). (Overseas)
Lamp Repeater — Repeater, the indications of which are given by lamps which are either lit or extinguished.
Landmark — Provided instead of a distant signal at places where it is necessary, in all cases, for trains to approach with caution. (Regional, AU)
Lateral — The direction across the track, parallel to the line joining the top of the rail heads.
Lateral Track Shifting Force — The lateral force exerted by each wheelset, tending to shift the rails and sleepers laterally in the ballast.
Lateral Wheel To Rail Force — The lateral force between an individual wheel and the rail including components at the wheel tread and/or flange, depending on the contact conditions.
LB — Line Blocked 
LC — Line Clear 
LCL — Less than Container Load 
LDU — Locomotive Display Unit 
Lead Investigator — A person appointed by the responsible authority, who is charged with the responsibility for the organisation, conduct and control of the investigation and for the production of the final investigation report, generally referred to in this Standard as ‘the investigator’.
Lead Rail — The rail in a crossingwork assembly between the heel of a set of points and the adjoining crossing.
Leaky Co-axial Cable — A special co-axial cable which radiates radio transmission signals continuously along its length.
LED — Light Emitting Diode signal 
LED Signal — Abbreviated term for 'light emitting diode signal'. (Overseas)
Less Than Container Load (LCL) — Many freight forwarders consolidate consignments which are less than a full container load into full containers for transport by rail. (Historical usage was 'less than car load').
Level Crossing — A location where the railway line and a road or pedestrian walkway cross paths on the same level.
Level Crossing Accident — A collision involving a train with either a road vehicle or a person at a level crossing, including a pedestrian crossing.
Level Crossing Test — This is an operational test of level crossing control circuits to check for adequate protection time, time of operation, etc. The checks are made by comparison with track plans, control tables etc. (Regional, AU)
Lever (or Switch) Plate — An identification plate fixed to a lever (or adjacent to a switch), describing the lever / switch function together with the order of pulling details. (Regional, AU)
Lever Bands — Contacts housed in a circuit controller that is associated with a lever. (Overseas)
Lever Frame — A frame in which the levers working signals and points in an area are mounted together and interlocked as required by the layout. (Regional, AU)
Lever Lock — An electro-mechanical mechanism fitted to hold (and release) the lever in a predetermined position. May be combined with a circuit controller. (Regional, AU)
Lever Rod — The rod connecting the point lever and crank.
Lever Sleeve — Piece of equipment placed over a lever as a blocking facility to physically prevent it from being operated. (Regional, AU)
Lever Stick — A circuit in track circuited areas, which insures that a signal lever is returned by the signaler to the normal or normal indication position after each train movement before the signal can be again cleared. (Regional, AU)
Lift (container) — The picking up and placing of a container either on or off a wagon.
Lift (track) — To raise and pack the track to the required design level.
Lifting Bar — When this type of bar is operated, it rises to rail surface level and falls again once it is in position. If a train is passing over the bar, the wheels prevent the bar from lifting and consequently prevent the associated points from being unlocked or operated. (Regional, AU)
Light Emitting Diode (LED) Signal — A colour light signal that uses light emitting diode technology in place of incandescent lamps and coloured filters. LED signals can be arranged to combine the Red, Yellow and Green Aspects into one aperture to generate the appropriate aspect.
Light Engine — See Light Locomotive. 
Light In Colour Light Aspect — Luminous indication constituting the whole or part of a signal.
Light Locomotive — One or more locomotives coupled without vehicles.
Light Rail Network — A passenger-carrying railway system operating with trams or other similar shorter length, lower speed and lower axle-load self-propelled vehicles. Typically used in urban areas and often having a shared right-of-way with road traffic.
Light Rail Stop — Any place designated for the picking up or setting down of passengers on a light rail route.
Light Rail Vehicle — A vehicle used on a light rail system.
Light Signals — Display coloured lights during day and night. (Non-preferred)
Light Track Equipment — Any small track maintenance machine or item of equipment that, under normal conditions, can be removed from the track by two workers. A lightly loaded road-rail vehicle that can be safely removed from the track may be regarded as light track equipment.
Light Track Vehicle — A track vehicle, generally a high-rail vehicle, which the Rail Infrastructure Manager has specified as light.
Light Unit — Assembly inside a sealed casing of all the parts (lamp, optical apparatus, coloured glass, terminals etc) necessary to exhibit a light's aspect.
Light, Battery Powered Tool Or Device — An internally powered tool or device that can be easily carried by one person and can be immediately removed from the track.
Light, Non-powered Hand Tool — A tool that can be carried and easily removed by one person and is not powered by compressed air, gas, electricity, hydraulics, explosive charge or internal combustion engine.
Light, Powered Hand Tool — An internally powered tool that can be carried easily by one person, without mechanical assistance.
Likeness — means the semblance or appearance of something
Limit Of Authority — The limit of Authority may be defined by a sign, a signal capable of displaying a STOP indication, or a specific kilometrage point on a line. It defines the location to which rail traffic may travel under a Proceed Authority or the limits of a work on track authority.
Limit Of Authority Overrun — Passing the end of movement authority. The conventional terminology for an overrun is a signal passed at danger (SPAD).
Limit Of Shunt Board — A notice board on a running line indicating a point beyond which shunting movements must not be made. (Regional, AU)
Limit Of Shunt Indicator (LOS) — A special type of position light signal or sign to terminate a shunting movement along a line in the wrong direction. (Overseas)
Line — Horizontal alignment of the rails. Line is generally measured using the offset at a defined point along a chord of defined length. For vertical alignment see top.
Line Blocked (LB) — The normal state of a block section when no permission has been given for a train to enter it. (Overseas)
Line Capacity — For a given section of line, the practical maximum number of trains per hour permitted by the signalling system.
Line Clear (LC) — The state of the block section after a train has been accepted but before it has entered the block section. (Overseas)
Line Clear Release — The signaler can only pull the lever for the section signal if line clear is obtained from the box ahead. The lever is released either for one pull or one train. (Overseas)
Line Haul — The term used to describe the movement of trains outside of terminals and yards with shunting employees. (Regional, AU)
Line Pole — The poles in an overhead line route which carry the cross-arms supporting the line wires or cables. (Regional, AU)
Line Relay — A relay receiving its operating energy through conductors of which the track rails form no part. (Regional, AU)
Line Wires — Electrical circuit single conductor wires or cables erected on an overhead line route. (Regional, AU)
Linside Indicator — A visual display device at or near the lineside that provides information relating to the operation of a train. An indicator may be provided in conjunction with a signal to qualify or amplify the instruction conveyed by the signal. (Regional, AU)
Lining — The process of establishing the track to the design vertical and horizontal alignment for tangents and curves.
Lit — The internal illumination of signalling equipment.
Livery — Rolling stock exterior colour scheme and markings.
Livestock Incident — Incident involving an animal(s) large enough to damage rail traffic.
Loading / Unloading Indicators — Indicators that relay movement instructions to drivers when controlling trains in sidings. (Overseas)
Loading Gauge — The device used to ascertain whether a load on a vehicle exceeds any height or width restrictions imposed over the line on which the loading is to travel. This is necessary because of clearances of structures, overhead bridges and tunnels, etc. Smaller than the structure gauge.
Loading Outline — An outline drawing or specification that describes the maximum permissible dimensions and shape of loading for transit over a nominated route.
Local Control Facility — An interlocking facility that may be switched to and from local control, but is capable of being switched to remote control. Local control facilities may include local control panels, key operated switches, or other equipment.
Local Earth — Portable appliance for establishing electrical connection between de-energised overhead traction wiring equipment and traction earth.
Local Possession — Possessions transfer control of a section of track from the train control system to a separate body for purposes such as major track repair or reconstruction. Trains other than those under the control of the separate body are denied access to the tracks. (Non-preferred)
Local Possession Authority — An authority that closes a defined portion of track for a specified period.
Locally Controlled Station — A block station where the switches and signals are controlled from a panel in the station building, or interlocking frame in a signal cabin, at the block station. (Regional, AU)
Location — A place in the Network with a designated name, identification number, or signaling reference.
Location (cases) — One or more signalling lineside apparatus housings at a particular site and the equipment contained therein. (Overseas)
Location Ahead Sign — A sign marking the approach to a location and the location’s recognition by its designated name. (Regional, AU)
Lock Circuit Controller — Electric circuit controller, the position of which depends on that of the point lock.
Lock Drop Contact — A proving contact fitted to a gravity operated electric lock. The contact is closed when the lock is in its locking position. (Regional, AU)
Lock Proving — Checking the position of a point lock.
Lock Rod — A bar or rod connecting the point switches to which the facing point lock is attached or on which the facing point lock operates. Usually placed as close as possible to the tip of the switch. (Regional, AU)
Lock Slide — The part of the clamp lock point mechanism which unlocks, moves and relocks the switches. (Overseas)
Lock Spike — Related Term: Springspike 
Lock Stretcher — A stretcher bar that is secured by a facing point lock. (Overseas)
Locked — The state of any signalling function or item of equipment when it is conditionally or unconditionally prevented from changing state or position by other parts of the signalling system. (Overseas)
Locking Bar — A fouling bar, provided for mechanically worked facing points, that acts in conjunction with the facing point lock, preventing the unlocking of the points during the passage of a train. It has generally been superseded by more modern forms of train detection.
Locking Chart — A drawing showing in graphical form, the layout of mechanical locking for a lever frame.
Locking Dog — A steel block attached to a locking bar or tappet of an interlocking machine, by means of which locking between levers is accomplished. (Overseas)
Locking Level — The interlocking level where controls between signalling functions are required to be satisfied before a route can be set. (Regional, AU)
Locking Level Release — Controls that are required to be satisfied before the locking on a route or a section of a route is released. Controls on conflicting routes are released by the train clearing track sections. If required, controls on opposing routes are released by the train timed to a stand on an appropriate track section. (Regional, AU)
Lockout — A system which allows a person requiring access to the track to provide personal protection by restricting or preventing the signalling of trains. (Overseas)
Locomotive — Self-propelled, non-passenger-carrying railway vehicles used for hauling or propelling other (typically freight or passenger) rolling stock.
Locomotive Display Unit (LDU) — On-board display unit on locomotives used in Section Authority System.
Locomotive Rolling Stock — Related Term: Locomotive
Long Route — A route combining one or more other routes. (Regional, AU)
Long Section Token — A type of token covering more than one single line section, usually in radio electronic token block areas. (Regional, AU)
Long Train — A freight train of 800m or more in length.
Long Welded Rail — Track where the rail is welded into lengths between 110 m and 300 m, with the rail lengths joined by fishplated joints. Some thermal expansion is provided for at the joints.
Lookout — A Competent Worker responsible for keeping watch for approaching rail traffic, and for warning other workers to stand clear of the line before the rail traffic arrives.
Lookout Working — A safety measure used by Competent Workers to carry out work on track without a formally issued work on track authority.
Loop — Alternative term for Siding. 
LOS — Abbreviated term for 'limit of shunt indicator'. 
Louvre Car (or Louvre Wagon) — A box wagon in which the wall panels include louvres or similar devices for ventilation. (Regional, AU)
Low Risk Failure — A wrong side failure where another part of the signalling system provides an acceptable level of protection. (Non-preferred)
Low Speed (Indication) Signal — A signal indication consisting of a small green light fixed below the 'stop' indication on a running signal. The low speed indication is provided to facilitate working where closer headway is desired for following trains and permits a train to approach and pass the signal at a restricted speed. (Regional, AU)
Low Visibility — Any condition that does not allow Competent Workers to view the distance required to work safely. (Regional, AU)
Lower Quadrant — A term applied to a semaphore signal whose clear position is designated by the arm below horizontal. (Regional, AU)
LPA — Local Possession Authority 
LRV — Abbreviation for 'Light Rail Vehicle'.
Luminance factor — Ratio of luminance level of a surface to that of an ideal white diffusing surface (ref. AS/NZS)
Lunar White — One of the standard colours used in railway signalling established by specification for roundels, lenses, association of American railroads (AAR), manual, namely, red, yellow, green, lunar white for roundels, lenses. Lunar white is white with a blue tinge. (Regional, AU)
Magnetic Latch Relay — A relay, the armature of which remains at full stroke in its last energised position when its control circuit is opened. (Regional, AU)
Main Arm — An arm of a semaphore main signal controlling a running movement. (Regional, AU)
Main Aspect — An aspect displayed by a colour light or semaphore signal controlling a running movement. (Regional, AU)
Main Cable — A twin or multicore lineside cable carrying signalling functions or power supplies between apparatus cases or equipment rooms.
Main Line — The running line normally used for running rail traffic through and between locations
Main Line Indicator — Wayside Indicators provided in train order working territory to indicate to a driver travelling on the authority of train order, that the interlocking equipment, such as points and level crossings, are set for the train to proceed. (Regional, AU)
Main Signal — A colour light signal capable of displaying a main aspect or a semaphore distant or stop signal. (Overseas)
Maintainer's Panel — An indication panel that repeats the indications sent to the Signaller and allows the maintainer to monitor the state of the interlocking. It generally contains additional fault condition indications. (Overseas)
Maintainer's Terminal — This commonly consists of a VDU, keyboard and printer, and is used to obtain essential fault diagnostic information. (Overseas)
Maintenance Provider — An organisation contracted to perform maintenance on infrastructure or rolling stock.
Maintenance Releases — A releasing switch provided on bi-directionally signalled double lines to enable maintenance staff to block the section for signalling movements in the reverse direction. (Regional, AU)
Maintenance Representative — An authorised Rail Infrastructure Manager's employee or an organisation contracted to the Rail Infrastructure Manager, responsible for maintaining network infrastructure.
Major Accident — An occurrence that has been classified as a major emergency, requiring a sustained response by emergency service personnel, e.g.: a collision or major derailment involving a passenger or freight train which results in multiple deaths/injuries and response by emergency service personnel.
Major Derailment — All derailments exceeding the limits defining minor derailment.
Major Incident — An incident assessed by the Rail Infrastructure Manager or delegate as having a potentially major impact on the Network, human life, property or the environment.
Manifest — A complete list of the units (containers) being carried by a service on a given date, itemised by the wagons on which they are being carried.
Manual Block Working — A method of special working which ensures sole occupancy by manually maintaining the block behind a rail traffic movement. (Regional, AU)
Manual Points Control Mechanism — A device used for the manual control of points. Includes ESML handle, crank handle and handthrow point lever.
Manual Train Order Working (MTOW) Territory — The portions of line where the Manual Train Order Working system of Safeworking is used.
Mark Off — Identify wagon with a mechanical defect.
Marker Light — Light indicating the front of a train.
Marker Light Signal — A small light fixed to a single light colour light signal post for the purpose of indicating the location of a signal in the event of the main signal light having failed. Off-set to the right on an automatic signal and directly underneath the main signal on a controlled signal. (Regional, AU)
Marshall — To arrange the order of vehicles in a train's consist. (Regional, AU)
Marshalling Irregularity — An irregularity in marshalling of a train, for example, not in accordance with the Dangerous Goods code.
Marshalling Yard — A train yard where shunting is performed as well as the stabling, light maintenance, inspection, and queuing of trains.
Master Roster — The planned roster that would operate if there were no operational or crewing changes. It contains all work allocated to a depot. The work is formulated into shifts and arranged into work lines.
Master Train Plan — Planned trains to fulfil planned transit legs. The train details include the route and timetable, the freight capacity, planned transit legs, fuelling stops, wagon attach
Material Change — Where a proposed change to an accredited rail organisation accredited activities and/or safety management system which may be reasonably expected to impact upon safety, or have the potential to do so.
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) — A document that provides information on the identification, hazards, precautions for use and safe handling of a specific product.
Maximum Service Mass — Represents the mass of the vehicle in full working order (includes passengers and / or crew).
Maximum Track Speed — The speed displayed on speed boards or in-cab signalling equipment (DMI).
May — Indicates the existence of an option.
MCS — Multiple Car Set 
Mechanical — Operated without any form of power assistance.
Mechanical Insulated Joint — A mechanical joint incorporating insulating channels, ferrules and end posts designed to electrically insulate the joined rails. (Regional, AU)
Mechanical Interlocking — An interlocking area where the points and signals are directly connected by wires and rods to the levers of a mechanical interlocking machine and are operated by the signaller or other qualified employee. (Regional, AU)
Mechanical Point Indicator — A device mechanically actuated by a lever, or a points switch, to indicate the position of the points (Regional, AU)
Mechanical Rail Joint — A rail joint made by mechanical means (as opposed to welding), generally using bolted fishplated sliding joints that are designed within limits to allow the rail to expand and contract with temperature.
Mechanically Jointed Rail Track — Track where the rail less than 110 metres in length is joined by mechanical rail joints.
Metal Flow — Extrusion or flow of steel on the running surface of the rail head.
Micro-switch — An electrical contact, usually sealed, with a snap-action, very short changeover movement activated by a plunger.
Mid-platform Signal — A Signal provided to enable two trains to be positioned at a platform by the use of block Signalling techniques. It may or may not form part of the standard aspect sequence. (Overseas)
Migration — the changeover process in time from one technology to another
Miniature Lever — Electrical control switches within relay interlocking control units. (Regional, AU)
Miniature Lever Frame — Related Term: Power Frame 
Minimum Static Height — The case of a stationary vehicle fitted with condemned diameter wheels combined with the suspension fully compressed to 'solid' condition, maximum permissible wear in bogie centre plates, pivots or any other surface which may reduce the height of the bogie or vehicle, body deflection under load and including fully deflated airsprings, where applicable.
Minor Derailment — Rolling stock derailed for less than sixty (60) metres and less than sixteen (16) kilometres per hour.
Minor Incident — A minor occurrence that can be managed without external assistance from emergency service personnel, e.g. derailments; minor injuries, etc.
Misconsign-ment — Freight that is dispatched to an incorrect destination. (Regional, AU)
Mixed Gauge Turnout — A turnout consisting of two or more track gauges where one or more gauges diverge. A turnout in which all gauges diverge is called a full mixed gauge turnout.
Mobile Radio — A radio mounted in a locomotive, track machine or terminal machinery and has an externally mounted antenna. A mobile radio usually puts out a stronger signal than a portable radio.
Modified Continuity Test — Performed by examining staff or train crew when locomotives are changed or loading is detached consisting of a continuity test.
Modified Or Partial Train Examination MX — Performed by examining staff or train crew when attaching pre-air tested and pre-mechanically examined vehicles to a locomotive or train. A maximum of two separate blocks may be placed within a train consist at any location consisting of - brake pipe leakage test; continuity test; issue of train examiners certificate for interstate freight trains (if the examination is performed by a train examiner). (Regional, AU)
Modified Or Partial Train Examination MX1 — Performed by examining staff or train crew when attaching non tested loading to a previously tested train or when vehicles on an existing train are remarshalled consisting of - brake pipe leakage test; continuity test; issue of train examiners certificate for interstate freight trains (if the examination is performed by a train examiner). (Regional, AU)
Modified Or Partial Train Examination MX2 — An air brake examination that confirms the correct brake operation on the first three vehicles beyond the further most amalgamation point when a locomotive/s or vehicles are attached or detached from a train. (Regional, AU)
Modified Rolling Stock — Rolling stock where a change has been implemented that affects it's compliance with the requirements in the standard.
Monorail Network — A passenger-carrying system in which vehicles travel over a single broad beam (rather than two narrow rails connected by sleepers as with conventional railway rolling stock).
MOT — Ministry of Transport 
Motion Sensing Detector — A device used to sense the presence, motion and direction of travel of a train.
Motive Power Unit — A rail vehicle used to provide the power to move itself or other vehicles.
Motor Car Carrier — A rail vehicle specially equipped for the transport of private and light commercial motor vehicles. (Regional, AU)
Motor Operated — Power operated by a motor or similar device connected to the signal arm (applicable to semaphore signals). Can also apply to points. (Overseas)
Motorail — A rail based trailer for the movements of cars.
Movable Rounded Light Unit (searchlight) — Light unit in which the aspect is given by means of a mechanism placing a roundel of the colour required near the focus of the lens unit, in front of the lamp.
Movement — The operation on rail of rail traffic .
Movement Authority — Permission for rail traffic to run to a specific location as a signalled move. (Overseas)
Moving Block — A train separation system where a safe space is maintained ahead of a moving train commensurate with its speed relative to other trains, track and train characteristics. (Regional, AU)
MSDS — Material Safety Data Sheet 
MTOW — Manual Train Order Working 
Multi Function Coupler — Coupler which makes all connections between the rail vehicles (mechanical, pneumatic and electrical) without human intervention, in contrast to automatic couplers which just handle the mechanical aspects.
Multiple Car Set (MCS) — Two or more compatible and easily separable single unit vehicles coupled together to form an operating consist. A MCS may include all powered vehicles or a combination of powered and trailer vehicles. (Regional, AU)
Multiple Coupled Locomotives — Where locomotives are multi-coupled, one crew is in control of, and operating, more than one unit, employees must regard the multi-coupled locomotives, for the purpose of train signalling and operation as one locomotive.
Multiple Unit — Term could refer to: 1. When two or more locomotives are coupled in such a manner that all the units are controlled by the driver from one control stand - usually in the leading locomotive; or 2. A multiple-unit passenger train in which the propulsion power is supplied by a diesel engine (see 'DMU') or by electric power supplied from an external source such as overhead wires (see 'EMU').
Multiple-aspect Signalling — A fixed colour light signal capable of giving three or more aspects. (Regional, AU)
Multiple-gauge Track — Track that allows rail traffic of different gauges to transit using a common rail
Must — The word Must indicates that a statement is mandatory.
Narrow Gauge — The track gauge of 1067mm (3' 6).
National Transport Commission (NTC) — Body established under a Commonwealth Act and an inter-governmental agreement with a charter to develop, monitor and maintain uniform or nationally consistent regulatory and operational reforms relating to road transport, rail transport, and inter-modal transport. This body is funded jointly by the Australian Government, states and territories.
NCO — Network Control Officer 
Neck — A small line of track in a yard used for the shunting of a locomotive. (Regional, AU)
Nested Containers — Nested containers refers to the transport of multiple empty containers to a location using a single slot on a particular wagon. (Regional, AU)
Net Tonne Kilometre — Net tonne kilometres is a measure of the payload of wagons (the net tonnes) multiplied by the distance travelled.
Net Train Weight — The weight of hauled vehicles in a train consist.
Network — A combination of track and other infrastructure controlled by an Rail Infrastructure Manager.
Network Access Level Crossing — Generally permanent level crossings provided at authorised locations for Network maintenance.
Network Control — The function responsible for managing train paths and issuing occupancy authorities.
Network Control Officer (NCO) — A Competent Worker who authorises, and may issue, Occupancy Authorities, and who manages rail traffic paths to ensure safe and efficient transit of rail traffic in the Network.
Network Control Officer Directions — Any instructions issued by Network Control relating to the management, maintenance movement and safe operation of all traffic within train control territory.
Network Notice — A notice issued by an Rail Infrastructure Manager which contains safeworking information for workers.
Network Registered — Rolling stock that the Rail Infrastructure Manager can consider for train or route acceptance.
Network Registration — The process used by a Rail Infrastructure Manager to permit initiation of the train acceptance process.
Neutral Relay — A relay which operates in response to a pre-determined change of the current in the controlling circuit, irrespective of the direction of the current.
Neutral Section — An arrangement of insulators and earthed equipment introduced into the overhead line equipment and designed to ensure that two adjacent electrical sections are kept separated even during the passage of the pantographs of electric trains.
Neutral Temperature — The rail temperature at which the track has no longitudinal thermal stresses.
Non Bulk Freight — General freight, comprising containerised freight, steel, motor vehicles, paper products and other general merchandise. (Regional, AU)
Non Conformal Contact — Contact between the wheel throat and rail gauge corner giving a gap of more than 0.4mm between their undeformed shapes.
Non Detectable — Rolling stock that does not activate track circuits.
Non Electrified Route — Not equipped to supply power to electric trains.
Non Field Lubricated Bearings — Bearings that do not require any lubricant to be added during the service period.
Non-automatic Signal — A signal that is not controlled by track circuits.
Non-controlled Location — A location where the rail traffic crew carries out the signalling and Safeworking operations.
Non-interlocked Points (on Signalled Running Lines) — Points which are not interlocked with the signalling and which must be securely locked by spike, point clips or clamps, and XL locks.
Non-storage Operation (anti Pre-selection) — A term used when pre-selection (storage) of a route is not provided and where the control to move points can only be set up if the points are free or available at the moment the control is applied. (Regional, AU)
Non-vital — Signalling equipment and circuits are considered non vital where failure to function correctly would not cause an unsafe outcome of the signalling system. Non-vital equipment and circuits do not affect the safe operation of the signalling system. (Regional, AU)
Non-vital Blocking — Non-vital blocking is blocking which is incorporated in an operator Interface or train control system to inhibit specific controls to call routes and points from being sent out to an interlocking. (Regional, AU)
Normal Contact — A term used to designate a current carrying contact when the operating mechanism is in the normal position. (Regional, AU)
Normal Direction — On a line for which the signalling is provided for one direction only, Normal applies to the signalled direction.
Normal Operation With Train Protection And Control (TPC) — This is when all TPC systems are operating and trains are running up to permissible speeds. (Train and infrastructure systems are within maintenance tolerances.)
Normal Position — The position in which signal and other devices are assumed to normally lie, according to rule, convention or otherwise, i.e., stop aspect displayed, points set for main track, devices energised or de-energised, etc. The normal position generally refers to the position where the protection is applied e.g. signals at stop, releases locked and not available.
Normal Speed — A speed that does not exceed the speed limit currently in effect for the location and type of rail traffic.
Normalise — Cancellation of a set route and release of the interlocking including approach locking, but not including route locking being maintained by a train within the route. (Regional, AU)
Nose — The machined or point end of a crossing near the point of intersection.
Nose Rail — Refer to 'female half of vee'. 
Nose To Nose Interlocking — Directional interlocking which may be cancelled, under certain conditions, to permit entry to an occupied track.
NTC — Abbreviation for 'National Transport Commission'. 
Null Count Test — This is a check against the circuit book analysis sheets to verify that there are no wires terminated on spare contacts of relays and other operating mechanisms, nor on spare fuses, links, terminals, and all other spare termination points. (Regional, AU)
Number Light — Backlit vehicle number.
Obscuration — A situation where there is an interruption of the driver's line of sight to an element. total obscuration occurs when the entire surface area of the element is hidden from the driver's view. Partial obscuration occurs when part of the surface area is hidden from view.
Obstacle Deflector — An extension of vehicle body underneath the headstock at a cab end to deflect large obstacles from the track. (Non-preferred)
Obstruct — To make a line unsafe for the passage of rail traffic.
Obstruction — Any defect in the track or track formation, or obstacle on, above or adjacent to the track which will prevent the safe passage of trains.
Occupancy — Presence of rail traffic or track workers on track.
Occupancy Authority — A formal authority that allows occupancy of a portion of track by rail traffic or for work on track.
Occupation Crossing — Level crossing provided for a private roadway.
Occupied — A track section having any part of a train present upon it.
Occurrence — A general term for accidents and incidents which lead to injury or loss, or which are considered by the responsible authority to have the potential to compromise safety.
OCS — One Control Switch 
Off (aspect) — A proceed aspect in a colour light signal, or the arm of a semaphore signal or disc signal inclined at 45 degrees or more, or distant signal other than at its most restrictive aspect. (Overseas)
Off And On Signal Proving — Checking whether the signal is 'off' (open) or 'on' (closed). 
Office Of The National Rail Safety Regulator (ONRSR) — Office of the National Rail Safety Regulator
Offset (curve) — The distance from the centre of a chord to the running edge of a curved rail.
Offset Couplers — Automatic couplers where there is a vertical mismatch between the centreline of the coupling head and the centreline of the coupler shank.
OIS — Operator Interface Station 
OL — Overlength Train 
On Time Running — Measures the proportion of train trips which arrive within a given time of the scheduled arrival time.
On Track Machine (or On Track Vehicle) — Any power operated, self-propelled, flange wheel mounted maintenance machine or recorder vehicle, excluding road/rail vehicles and other small machines placed on and off track by hand or lifting equipment on site, such as re-sleepering plant.
On-site Test — These are tests using signalling power supplies of equipment and circuits installed in signalling structures with the track side equipment connected. (Regional, AU)
One Control Switch (OCS) — A type of route setting control panel having one switch (or other device) to control each route. (Regional, AU)
One Spot — A repair facility designed to bring vehicles in need of repair to a central depot fully equipped with materials, handling equipment, tools and spares. (Regional, AU)
ONSR — Office of the National Rail Safety Regulator 
Open Ballasted Track — Track comprising rails, fastenings, sleepers and ballast. It does not include track comprising slab or embedded systems, or track on transom deck bridges.
Open Channel — A system which allows all radio users to take part in all conversations.
Open Circuit — The condition applying when a circuit is incomplete, as by the opening of a switch, or by the omission of a connection in the circuit, thus preventing current from flowing.
Open Level Crossing — Level crossing provided for a public roadway.
Open Standards — Standards publicly available and without constraint; equally available to all parties
Open Wagon (or Open Car) — A wagon with substantially vertical sides and ends, a flat floor and an open top, with or without doors in the side walls or floor. 
Operating Headway — The minimum spacing between trains, based on the specified maximum line capacity in trains per hour.
Operating Restriction — A restriction on the operation of rollingstock (e.g. reduced speed, axle load) to provide an appropriate level of risk in response to a specific infrastructure condition.
Operational Control System — Hardware, software and network infrastructure that combine as a system to monitor and control safe and efficient operations.
Operational Requirements — The technical specifications for rail operations on a route, including time of entry to and exit from the route, duration of use of the route, technical specification of rolling stock and rail infrastructure facilities, and safeworking standards.
Operational Use — The manner in which the equipment is used for the purposes of running trains. (Regional, AU)
Operator Interface — The interface between the signalling system and the signaler which provides all the information and functionality needed by the signaler to control and monitor the signalling system. (Regional, AU)
Operator Interface Station (OIS) — Any microprocessor based man-machine interface, typically any graphic user interface (GUI) using a keyboard, mouse and any array of visual display units (VDUs) to form a workstation for the purpose of train control.
Operator's Representative — A person authorised by an Operator to act on their behalf.
Opposing Train — Any train other than a following train which, if it continued beyond a nominated signal, would cross over or occupy the same track as another train.
Organisation — A Rail Infrastructure Manager or an operator, or a person or a body that is both Rail Infrastructure Manager and operator.
OSS — An 'overspeed sensor system' as applied to a TPWS. 
OTSI — Office of Transport Safety Investigations (NSW) 
Out Of Gauge Loads — A vehicle load that does not conform to the relevant loading outline.
Out Of Gauge Rolling Stock — Any vehicle that does not conform to a reference rolling stock outline applicable to a particular route.
Out Of Use — Non-operational equipment that is still connected to the infrastructure.
Outer Home Signal — An outer home signal is a controlled signal which controls the movement of trains over the portion of line between that signal and the next signal in advance where a risk may only exist under certain circumstances. For example, a risk may exist for an approaching train when another train is required to shunt back outside a home signal towards the outer home signal. (Regional, AU)
Overhaul — Actions carried out at the end of the service period to return the item to a condition that should give reliable operation for a further full service period.
Overhead Line Equipment — The structures and overhead equipment necessary for the traction power supply for electric rolling stock.
Overhead Supply — The supply of electric current to the overhead wiring system for traction purposes.
Overhead Traction Wiring Equipment — See Overhead Line Equipment.
Overheated Bearing — Any bearing visibly overheating, or running hotter than other bearings on same vehicle.
Overlap — The overlap of a signal is an extension of a track circuit beyond a stop signal to provide a margin of safety beyond that signal. The overlap must be unoccupied and free of opposing signal locking before the signal is permitted to show a proceed aspect.
Overlap Maintenance — If a choice of overlaps exists beyond a stop signal then the clearing of the signal in rear will lock any facing points in the overlap beyond the stop signal to prevent the operation of those points towards an overlap that is not free, or is occupied (running signals); overlap maintenance will maintain that locking when an approaching train has passed the signal in rear.
Overlap Span — An overlapping of the ends of two lengths of overhead line equipment, arranged in such a manner that the pantographs of electric trains can pass smoothly and without break of contact from one contact wire to the next over the same track.
Overlay — A detection device designed to detect the approach of a train in addition to the normal track circuit train detection is referred to as an overlay device.
Overlay Track Circuit — A track circuit installed on a section of track over which one or more existing track circuits are operating. Overlay track circuits are usually audio-frequency systems, configured so that the main and overlay track circuits operate independently of each other. Normally used for detecting the passage of a train at or past a specific position.
Overlength Train (OL) — A train is overlength if its length exceeds the holding capacity of a designated running track at a crossing station.
Overview — A signalling diagram or display that shows the whole of the area being controlled, usually with reduced detail. (Overseas)
P2 Force — Total vertical force (static plus 'low frequency' dynamic forces) per wheel when the rolling stock operates over a defined angular discontinuity (ramp) in the rail vertical profile, representing an idealised dipped rail joint.
PA — Abbreviation for Proceed Authority
Pacific National — Freight train operator throughout all Australian states.
Package Axle Bearings — A single packaged (or cartridge) unit, containing all the bearing assembly parts, preset, lubricated and sealed for assembly on the axle.
Packing — The process for consolidating the ballast under the sleepers, timbers or bearers for the proper support of the track.
Pad — An item manufactured from elastic, electrically insulated or low friction material which is placed under the rail and intended to perform a specific function, e.g. vibration isolation, electrical insulation.
Pandrol — A trade name, Pandrol supplies plates and resilient fastenings. [Other]
Panel (track) — A section of plain track or crossingwork comprising rails, track fastenings and sleepers (tie bars if applicable) which has been assembled for transport or installation into track as a unit.
Panel Processor — A microprocessor interfacing between the operator interface and the signalling interlocking and building the information sets required from the input data elements. (Regional, AU)
Pantograph — An apparatus fixed to the roof of electric traction vehicles to draw current from the overhead supply.
Parallel Bonding — The bonding of both rails of a turnout such that they are connected in parallel with the other straight rails comprising the track circuit. (Overseas)
Park Brake — A device to secure a rail vehicle against movement.
Part Worn Rail — Any recycled rail that has previously carried traffic, including rail used for closures and inserts.
Parting — Rail traffic becoming uncoupled en route (Also known as dividing in some Networks).
Pass — To overtake other rail traffic travelling in the same direction in single line territory.
Passenger Kilometre — Unit of measure representing the transport of one passenger over a distance of one kilometre.
Passenger Line — A line signalled to the standard required for trains conveying passengers. (Overseas)
Passenger Rolling Stock — Rolling stock that carries people and facilities for these people. Excludes locomotive and infrastructure maintenance rolling stock.
Passing Contact — Contact which closes or opens for a short period only and usually when the controller is operated in a certain direction only, e.g. normal to reverse. (Regional, AU)
Passing Loop — A passing loop is a section of track that runs parallel and connected at both ends to the main line. This allows, for example, two trains in oposite directions to cross each other, or a faster train to pass and overtake a slower one that is waiting in the loop. Passing loops are generally used on lines with only one track, and allows for increased running capabilities and minimalised running times.
Passive Control Level Crossing — Road and pedestrian level crossing incorporating line markings and or warning or advisory signs to alert vehicular or pedestrian traffic that they are approaching a crossing and to take care. Road and pedestrian level crossings have static warning signs (stop or give way) that are visible on approach. This signage is unchanging with no mechanical aspects or light devices. Control of the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic across a railway level crossing by signs or devices, none of which are activated during the approach or passage of a train, and which rely on the road user detecting the approach or presence of a train by direct observation.
Passive Level Crossing Warning System — Control of the movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic across a railway level crossing by signs or devices, none of which are activated during the approach or passage of a train, and which rely on the road user detecting the approach or presence of a train by direct observation.
Path — A train path is the right to use consecutive sections of rail track for defined periods of time.
Patrol — Visual inspections for obvious unsafe conditions, changed conditions, or evidence of high rates of deterioration of the infrastructure that indicate unacceptable risk to operations. Patrols should be sufficient to enable the need for more detailed inspections to be determined.
Pedestrian Crossing — A crossing at substantially the same level as a railway track that is used by pedestrians to cross the railway track
Per Way Patroller — An approved person having responsibility for regular permanent way inspections to ensure the safety of the line.
Periodical Ticket — A ticket valid for more than one day.
Permanent Rail Joint — Non-welded rail joints intended for use in track in the long term. They include fishplated joints, glued insulated joints and expansion joints.
Permanent Record — A record made in writing or in an electronic system, and kept for reference and audit.
Permanent Speed Board — A fixed board which indicates to the driver the maximum allowable speed for trains on the portion of line ahead up to the next speed board.
Permanent Way — The system of earthworks, drainage, structures, and trackwork (but excluding signalling and communications systems) completed to the required clearance, grade and alignment in readiness for traffic.
Permissible Rollingstock Outline — The outline that defines the limiting cross-sectional geometry for rollingstock and its load including kinematic effects. It includes the static rollingstock outline and the affects of vehicle centre and end throw, track tolerances and dynamic rollingstock limits. Also referred to as maximum kinematic rollingstock outline.
Permissible Speed — The maximum allowable safe speed over a section of line which applies to all trains when not operating at an EPS. Normally identified in the sectional appendix, and sometimes shown as a differential speed. (Overseas)
Permissible Structure Outline — The outline relative to the track cross-section that defines the limiting cross-sectional geometry which no part of any structure or trackside fixture may infringe.
Permissive Block Working — A system whereby two or more trains travelling in the same direction and spaced a block apart, may consecutively enter a block section of single line on signal indication. (Regional, AU)
Permissive Signal — A fixed signal that is normally controlled by the passage of rail traffic and its normal indication is a Proceed Authority. (Regional, AU)
Permissive Working — A system whereby rail traffic travelling in the same direction may enter a single line on a signal indication and are permitted to proceed at restricted speed to the preceding train or next stop indication. (Regional, AU)
Phantom Aspect — An aspect displayed by a colour light signal, different from the aspect intended, caused by a light from an external source being reflected by the optical system of the signal. (Regional, AU)
Pick-up — The energisation of an electromagnetic device to pick up and close its front contacts. (Regional, AU)
Pick-up Value — The electrical value which, when applied to an electromagnetic instrument, will cause the moving member to move to the position which will just close the front contacts or visually indicate its energised position. (Regional, AU)
Piggyback — Transporting complete road trailers on railway flat wagons. (Regional, AU)
Pilot — A Competent Worker, who accompanies, directs and advises rail traffic crews.
Pilot Staff — A metal staff that authorises travel through a pilot staff section. (Regional, AU)
Pilot Staff Lock — An annett lock at a single line starting signal which holds a half pilot staff for the single line section. Removal of the half pilot staff operates a pilot staff lock contact which disconnects the section control circuits and prevents the starting signals at each end of the section from clearing. (Regional, AU)
Pilot Staff Notice (PSN) — A form used to give details of pilot staff working. (Regional, AU)
Pilot Staff Ticket — A written authority issued after a driver or track vehicle operator has seen the pilot staff or half-staff for a section. (Regional, AU)
Pilot Staff With Key — A staff in two halves with a key at each end. Each half is secured in a pilot staff lock box at each end of a single line track block or track control signalling section. For use in the case of starting signal failure or obstruction on the single line. (Regional, AU)
Pilot Staff Working — A method of working rail traffic when the normal system of safeworking is not available. (Regional, AU)
Pilotman — A person who has been appointed to manage the passage of trains over a single line during the failure of equipment, during repairs or due to an obstruction. (Regional, AU)
Pin — A round spike used to fasten some types of plates to timbers or a connecting pin used in point spreader bars and connecting rods. (Regional, AU)
Plain Axle Bearings — Bearings using sliding motion between the moving load-bearing surfaces.
Plate — A steel plate fitted between the rail and sleeper or timber to spread the load on the sleeper. Plates may be double shoulder, clip fastening, taper, level or cant to suit requirements.
Plateau — The level elevated platform in a flangeway or a flange bearing third rail transfer or crossing unit which reduces excessive wear and batter on the nose.
Platform — A raised or level area, next to the line, that allows people to enter and leave trains.
Platform Sharing — Permitting two passenger trains to occupy a platform line simultaneously, other than for the purposes of attaching, detaching or removing vehicles, without the existence of a mid-platform signal.
Platform Starting Signal — A stop signal located such that either the longest passenger (or empty coaching stock) train authorised to use the platform would, if stopped at the signal, still have a portion of the passenger accommodation alongside the platform, or the leading end of the train passes over the AWS equipment associated with the signal before it is despatched from the platform. (Overseas)
Plug Bond — A traction bond with the termination on each end of the bond consisting of a cylindrical plug which forms a close fit in a hole drilled in the rail web. It is secured in place by the expanding action of a bond plug being driven into a hole through its centre. (Regional, AU)
Plug In Relay — A relay designed to plug into a plug board. The electrical connections are permanently made to the plug board allowing the relays to be changed without any disconnection of individual wires. The plug boards are usually pin coded to prevent an incorrect type of relay being fitted. (Regional, AU)
Plunger — A button that is depressed to activate signalling equipment. (Regional, AU)
Plunger (facing Point Lock) — The part of a facing point lock which secures the lock rod to the plunger stand when the points switch is locked. (Regional, AU)
Plunger Proving Of Switch Blades — Check of the blades of a switch effected by the driving in of a spring piston under the action of a switch blade at the end of its movement towards the stock rail. (Regional, AU)
PN — Abbreviated term for Pacific National. 
Point (s) — A track component that provides a path for a wheel to transfer from one track to another and usually consists of a section of bent and planed rail (known as the switch rail) and its connecting parts (for example switch rod brackets, reinforcing bars and high strength tips where appropriate). The term point is also used to describe the end of the switch rail that is machined into a sharp tip.
Point Blade — The machined pivoting or flexing running rail component of a half set of points.
Point Clamp — A lockable heavy duty clamp for manually securing a point switch to the stockrail for an extended period.
Point Clip — A lockable clip for manually securing a point switch to the stock rail.
Point Contact — The fixed contact piece for either a front or back contact of a relay.
Point Detector — A device for proving that points are correctly set before a signal can be cleared to authorise passage of a train over the points. (Overseas)
Point Extension Iron — A bracket bolted to the toe of a point switch which provides an extended connection point for point detector rods. (Regional, AU)
Point Handle — A collective term for Crank Handle and Pump Handle. (Overseas)
Point Machine — The encased equipment for the powered operation of a set of points.
Point Machine With Hand Crank Or Long Lever — Point machine, the action of which, in the event of removal or failure of the motive power, may be effected by hand, under certain conditions, by means of a movable crank or a lever connected to the motor. (Overseas)
Point Operating Mechanism — A mechanism for changing the direction a set of points is lying. (Regional, AU)
Point Pawl Lock — A point operating mechanism which provides direct switch to stockrail facing point locking through a vertically operating pawl arm which requires external point switch and lock detection and is powered by a purpose built electric point machine or electro-pneumatic (EP) motor. (Regional, AU)
Point Slide Chair — A rail base plate under the stock rail and switch. It provides vertical support to the stock rail and a horizontal surface for the switch to slide on. Chairs are attached to the stock rail and to the timber under the points.
Point Switch — A movable tapered track rail, the point of which is designed to fit against the stock rail. The pointed end of the switch rail (Switch Blade) is referred to as the Toe and the other end, the pivot end, as the Heel.
Point Switch Rollers — A roller under a point switch and fixed to the stockrail, which lifts the point switch off the slide plate as the switch moves from the closed to the open position and vice versa. Several rollers can be fitted along each point switch to facilitate movement, especially for heavy switches on super elevated track.
Points And Crossings — Track structures which provide for one track to join or cross another.
Points Correspondence Test — This is a test to ensure that the position of a set of points is in agreement with that required by the interlocking. (Regional, AU)
Points Fixed — Third rail crossingwork designed to permit the standard gauge or broad gauge track to turn out. The diverge move is effected by the use of ramped manganese blocks on which the wheel flange runs and guard rails.
Points Fixed Heel — Points which utilise permanently fastened heel blocks. Localised flexing of the switch occurs ahead of the fixed heel and the switch rail continues beyond the heel.
Points Securing Device — A device approved by Rail Infrastructure Managers used to prevent movement of points from the required position.
Polarised Circuit — A circuit path in which the flow of electric current is reversed from time to time. (Regional, AU)
Polarity Reversal (phasing) — The reversal of the polarity between similar adjoining track circuits across the insulating block joints to prevent the possibility of one track circuit feed falsely energising the relay of the adjoining track circuit in the event of breakdown of the insulating block joints. (Regional, AU)
Polarpak — The polarpak is a 40 kilowatt diesel engine driven portable generator unit fitted to some 5-pack well wagons to provide in-transit power for refrigerated containers. (Regional, AU)
Polyphase Relay — An alternating current relay having two or more windings, operating on an induction motor principle, all windings of which must be properly energised. (Regional, AU)
Position Light Signal — A light signal, other than a main signal, that gives its indication by the position and colour of its lights. (Overseas)
Positive Train Identification (PTI) — A system that identifies a train directly from equipment on board the train for the purposes of train description, rather than from a train describer. (Overseas)
Positive Train Separation (PTS) — An American automatic train protection system specification evolving from their advanced train control system specification. The positive train separation system is intended to overlay existing signalling systems to provide enforcement and is transmission based using radio links to the train. (Overseas)
Possession Limit Marker — A red light, red flag or sign used to indicate a Local Possession Authority limit.
Possession Protection Officer — The Competent Worker responsible for coordinating protection of worksites under a Local Possession Authority (LPA).
Power Car (or Power Vehicle) — A vehicle that contains the equipment and facilities necessary to produce, convert or distribute the power required for propulsion, control and auxiliary purposes.
Power Frame — A lever frame controlling power operated equipment. (Regional, AU)
Power Interlocking — An interlocking area where the points and signals are operated electrically, hydraulically or pneumatically. They are controlled by a signaler using an interlocking machine or relay interlocking control unit. (Regional, AU)
Power Interlocking Machine — An interlocking machine with small mechanical type levers or pistol grip slide levers with mechanical interlocking provided between the levers which operate circuit controllers for a power interlocking. (Regional, AU)
Power Signal Box — A signal box from which the signalman controls the working of the apparatus by means of any power supply (pneumatic, electric, hydraulic).
Power Signal Box With Free Levers Or Thumb Switches — Power signal box with route or individual levers, in which the control levers or switches are always free and where interlocking is effected by the operation of electrical interlocking acting only on the control circuits.
Power Signal Box With Individual Levers — Power signal box from which the operation of each lever controls the working of only one apparatus or of a group of associated apparatus.
Power Signal Box With Route Levers — Power signal box where all the signalling apparatus, the movement of which is necessary to ensure complete setting up of the specified route, are simultaneously operated by route levers. This operation may be effected by one lever per route (or part of a rroute) or two levers corresponding to the extremities of the route (or part of a route).
Power Supply Conditioner — A device which filters and corrects the waveform and voltage of a mains power supply for sensitive electronic equipment.
Power Worked Signal — Fixed signals worked by electricity or compressed air. (Regional, AU)
Pre-setting Control — A control which is carried out automatically when the safety conditions required are satisfied.
Pre-site Test — These are tests of manufactured equipment and circuits using temporary power supplies prior to site installation. These are not certification tests, but rather quality control tests.
Prescribed Train — A train laden in excess of a specified percentage of the maximum load that can be hauled by the motive power unit, for that portion of line. (Regional, AU)
Preselection — Refer Queuing (Non-preferred)
Prestressed Concrete Sleeper — A sleeper utilising compressed concrete and prestressing tendons to resist flexure.
Prestressing Tendon — A strand or wire within a sleeper, which under tension, compresses the concrete.
Prevent Shunt — The prevent shunt of a track circuit is the maximum value of the resistance which, placed between the two rails of a track circuit, will prevent the energisation of the track relay. (Overseas)
Principles — Principles describe fundamentals applicable to all railways. Principles defined in ACOP may include a list of factors that should be considered.
Private Siding — A siding owned and maintained by a person who does not own, control or manage the running line with which the siding connects.
Proceed Authority — An Authority that allows rail traffic to enter and occupy a portion of line and proceed in the forward direction.
Proceed Indication — Any signal indication other than stop. (Regional, AU)
Processing Capacity — The maximum number of control and indication input/output processing cycles per unit of time that can be handled without incurring any cycle processing delay. For any given system this will result in a maximum number of field objects the system is able to control, which is also a function of the complexity of the controlling / interlocking logic between the field objects. (Regional, AU)
Processing Speed — The speed with which the system processes a control or indication input, and outputs the required response to the field or signaller respectively. (Regional, AU)
Prohibition Notice — If an authorised officer is of the opinion that at any railway premises there is occurring or is about to occur any activity that involves or will involve an immediate risk to the health or safety of any person, the authorised officer may give to the person who has or may be reasonably presumed to have control over the activity a notice prohibiting the carrying on of the activity until the matters that give or will give rise to the risk are remedied.
Propelling — To push rail traffic away from the controlling locomotive or motive power unit.
Protected Level Crossing — A level crossing with automatic flashing lights warning signals with or without bells and half boom gates.
Protected Wrong Side Failure — A wrong side failure where another part of the signalling system provides an acceptable level of protection. (Overseas)
Protecting Signal — A signal that protects a train from conflicting movements and/or obstructions.
Protection — The means used to prevent rail traffic from entering a worksite or other portion of track, or to prevent road or pedestrian traffic entering a level crossing.
Protection Officer — The Competent Worker responsible for managing the rail safety component of worksite protection. Also see Worksite Supervisor and Work Site Safety Supervisor.
Protocol — A set of rules that govern the operation of functional units to achieve communication. In data transmission, mainly based on message structures and timing.
Proved — Evidence provided by electrical or other means that a function is in a specified state.
Provisioning Centre — An area in which locomotives are fuelled and serviced.
Proximity Detector — An induction loop device in the track which is operated electromagnetically by the proximity of a rail vehicle above the detector. (Regional, AU)
PSN — Pilot Staff Notice 
PTA Of WA Network — Abbreviation for 'Perth metropolitan narrow gauge network'. 
PTAWA — Public Transport Authority of Western Australia 
PTI — Positive Train Identification 
PTS — Positive Train Separation 
PTV — Public Transport Victoria 
Public Timetable — Contains the list of scheduled passenger services (but not a complete list of all train movements as per working timetable). (Regional, AU)
Pull Apart — A rail failure where the ends separate producing a gap in the rail.
Pull Rod — The rod connecting the spreader bar and (point lever) crank to facilitate operation of the points.
Pulling List — The listed sequence in which point and signal controls must be operated to set routes. (Regional, AU)
Pulsating (light) — A regular variation in light intensity, used to distinguish the indication from a steady light of the same colour. (Regional, AU)
Pulsating Current Fed Track Circuit — Track circuit in which the current is successively switched off and established, possibly reversed, and operating on the total effect of the action which each interruption or impulse of current causes in the receiving apparatus without consideration of the frequency or duration of the impulses.
Pump Handle — A portable handle for the manual operation of a clamp lock or a set of train operated points. (Regional, AU)
Queensland Rail Standard Gauge Network — QLD/NSW border to Brisbane standard gauge network. [Obsolete]
QueenslandRail — Rail Transport Operator for the narrow gauge network that covers most of Queensland
QueenslandRail Narrow Gauge Network — Queensland narrow gauge network.
QueenslandRail Network — Queensland narrow and standard gauge network.
Queuing — Time spent by a train at terminals or intermediate points while waiting on rail traffic ahead to clear. (Regional, AU)
Quick Pick Relay — A relay which, when energy is applied, will pick up quicker than an ordinary relay. (Regional, AU)
Quick Release Relay — A relay which, when the controlling circuit is opened or completely shunted, will drop away quicker than an ordinary relay. (Regional, AU)
RA — Abbreviated term for 'right away indicator'. 
RAC — Abbreviation for 'Railway Association of Canada'. (Overseas)
Radio Electronic Token Block (RETB) — A signalling system used mainly on single lines, where an electronic token is transmitted between the controlling signal box and train. [Obsolete]
Rail — The rolled steel section used to guide wheelsets of rolling stock. The most common rails are Tee head which is the Australian Standard. Rail is described by weight per unit length, i.e. kilograms/metre (kg/m) commonly reduced to kg and pounds per yard (lb/yd) commonly reduced to lb.
Rail Anchor — A fastening which is attached to the foot of the rail and against the sleeper to transfer longitudinal forces to the sleepers and in turn to the track structure. Rail anchors are utilised to resist rail creep and expansion and contraction in long rail.
Rail Base Plate — A rail support plate between the rail and bearer at crossingwork assemblies utilising resilient rail fastenings. The plate may be level or taper.
Rail Bond — A cable fixed across a break or joint in one rail, or between two rails to provide a path for traction return current or track-circuits.
Rail Brace — A cast or fabricated component which supports the rail in a vertical position.
Rail Buckle — Misalignment of the rails generally caused by high rail stresses due to high temperatures.
Rail Cascaded — Rail which has been removed from one track and relayed on another track.
Rail Combined Wear — Rail wear where both side and top wear are significant. Combined wear may be calculated by determining the loss of cross-sectional area as a percentage of the original area of the head.
Rail Contact Stress — Stress in rail head from local deformation in the region of the contact with the wheel. The magnitude and depth of the maximum stress is dependent on the tangential and normal forces and also the curvature of the wheel and rail surfaces. High rail contact stresses will accelerate the deterioration of the rail through a mechanism termed rolling contact fatigue.
Rail Corridor — The land on which a railway is built; comprising all property between property fences, or from the nearest rail in each direction for the distance specified by the Rail Infrastructure Manager.
Rail Defect — A surface or internal defect in the rail which may affect the serviceable life of the rail.
Rail Fastenings — Devices for holding rail to sleepers or to a base plate, which is in turn held to the sleeper. Direct fixation of rail to the timber sleeper is by dog spike, lock spike, or screw spike against the edge of the rail foot, either with or without a baseplate. Indirect fixation is achieved by resilient or elastic fastenings holding rail to the baseplate and one of the spike types holding the baseplate to the sleeper. With concrete or steel sleepers elastic fastenings hold the rail directly to the sleeper through inserts or shoulders. The main elastic fastenings in use on Australian railways are ‘first’, Pandrol, ‘safelock and ‘trak-lok’.
Rail Flange — The base or foot of the rail
Rail Gauge Corner — The section of the crown of the rail on the side towards the track centreline which has a slope of between 10 degrees and 50 degrees to the line joining the highest points on the two rails.
Rail Infrastructure Manager — In relation to rail infrastructure of a railway, means the person who has effective control and management of the rail infrastructure, whether or not the person- (a) owns the rail infrastructure; or (b) has a statutory or contractual right to use the rail infrastructure or to control, or provide, access to it.
Rail Level — The level of the top of the rail in track. On a curve the inner or low leg is used for measurements.
Rail Motor — Self propelled passenger rail vehicle.
Rail Operator — A generic term that refers to an accredited operator of rolling stock.
Rail Pad — The bearing between the rail and the sleeper.
Rail Safety Regulator — The National Rail Safety Regulator or an Acting National Rail Safety Regulator
Rail Safety Work — ‘Rail safety work’ is defined in section 8 of the Rail Safety National Law refer: http://www.onrsr.com.au/operations/legislation
Rail Safety Worker — A Competent Worker who has carried out, is carrying out, or is about to carry out, rail safety work.
Rail Seat — The area on top of the sleeper on which the rail sits extending between the field and gauge shoulders.
Rail Side Wear — Rail wear that normally occurs in the high leg of curved track and has only a minimal amount of top wear. Side wear can be measured either by determining the width of the rail 16mm below the running surface, or the loss of head area as a percentage of the original head area.
Rail Surface Defect — A rail surface condition, for example corrugation, checking and rust, which does not permit an adequate ultrasonic test.
Rail Temperature — The temperature of rail as recorded on the shade side of the rail web at the time of working.
Rail Top Wear — Rail wear that normally occurs on the top running surface of the rail in tangent track or the low legs of curves. Usually has a minimal side wear component.
Rail Traffic — Trains and track vehicle or vehicles travelling in the network.
Rail Traffic Crew — Competent Workers responsible for the operation of rail traffic.
Rail Traffic Integrity — The requirements that must be met for rail traffic to be deemed to be fit for purpose and able to enter and travel in the Network.
Rail Traffic Working Advice — A form used to provide information to rail traffic crews regarding other rail traffic movements.
Rail Transport Operator — As defined in the Rail Safety National Law
Rail Vehicle — Vehicle that operates on or uses a railway track for the carriage of passengers or freight and includes a train, carriage and wagon. Term Rail Vehicle generally used where the context requires, or is enhanced by, a differentiation between rail and road vehicles.
Rail Vehicle Classification — A four character group indicating the owner, type of vehicle and operating characteristics.
Rail Vehicle Classification Check Letters — A letter determined by special formula, which is included in all vehicle identification numbers as a suffix.
Rail Vehicle Detection Territory — The portions of line where the system of safeworking relies on track circuiting or axle counters. (Regional, AU)
Rail Workplace — A place where rail safety work is carried out, and includes any place where a rail safety worker goes, or is likely to be, while doing rail safety work.
Rail-connect — To connect overhead wiring supply to the traction return rail to ensure the immediate discharge of electricity if the overhead wiring becomes live.
Rail, Asymmetrical — An irregular shaped rail of low height and thick web, which is used primarily for the manufacture of switches for tangential turnout points. The short length of the switch rail permits resilient rail fastening of the gauge side of the stock rail.
Rail, Closure — A length of rail shorter than standard length which is used to join sections of longer rails or to join turnout components.
Rail, Common — A rail in third rail or dual gauge trackwork which is utilised by traffic of both gauges.
Rail, Control Cooled — The process of controlling the cooling rate of rolled rail to eliminate hydrogen inclusions.
Rail, Head Hardened — Rail which has had the head heat treated after rolling to increase the hardness. The hardness increase is generally in the order of 80 Brinell hardness points.
Rail, Plain Carbon — Rail typically used by railways. It contains carbon in the order of 0.6-0.8% and manganese of 0.6-1.0%.
Rail, Primary — Unwelded rail, comprising standard length and approved short length rails as supplied by the manufacturer.
Rail, Running — A rail on which the wheel is supported and guided.
Rail, Serviceable — Previously used rail which is in a suitable condition for reuse in trackwork.
Rail, Transposed — Rail which has been removed from track and relayed, generally on the same track, but with the running edge transposed, i.e. former field side placed on gauge side.
Railguard — A deflector mounted in front of the leading wheels of a vehicle to deflect small objects from the rails. Also known as 'lifeguards' or 'guard-irons'. (Non-preferred)
Railway — railway means a guided system, or proposed guided system, designed for the movement of rolling stock having the capability of transporting passengers or freight (or both) on a railway track with a gauge of 600 millimetres or more, together with its rail infrastructure and rolling stock.
Railway Employee — An employee or contractor of an owner or operator who performs railway safety work and includes a person who performs railway safety work on a voluntary or unpaid basis.
Railway Infrastructure — Facilities other than rolling stock necessary for a railway to operate safely including railway track, associated track structures, over- or under-track structures, supports (including supports for railway equipment or items associated with the use of a railway), tunnels, bridges, stations, platforms, train control systems, signalling systems, communication systems, electric traction infrastructure, buildings, workshops and associated equipment.
Railway Network — A railway system within Australia owned or managed by a Rail Infrastructure Manager. Some railway networks are connected to others and permit interoperability. Other railway networks are not connected to others.
Railway Operation — The construction and maintenance, or the construction or maintenance, of infrastructure of a railway;
Railway Safety Audits — A system of regular audits to verify whether railway safety activities comply with the planned arrangements and to determine the effectiveness of the railway safety system.
Railway Service — A passenger service or a freight service; or the service of providing (or providing and operating) railway infrastructure for another industry participant.
Railway Track Signal — A device attached to a rail that explodes on impact, used to attract attention of rail traffic crews and workers.
Railway Tramway Crossing — A crossingwork assembly at which railway and tramway tracks intersect. (Regional, AU)
Rake — Vehicles, usually not formed as a train, moved as a unit during shunting and marshalling.
Ramp (flange) — That portion within a flangeway where the wheel flange makes initial contact and is gradually elevated to the plateau.
RCS — Remote Controlled Signalling 
Re-enterable Cable Joint — A form of cable joint housing which is not permanently sealed, permitting subsequent access to the joint interior without destruction of the housing or cable. (Regional, AU)
Re-enterable Cable Route — A cable route where the cables can be added or removed from the route e.g. surface troughing or underground conduit. (Regional, AU)
Ready To Start Indicator — A non-preferred term for 'right away indicator'. (Non-preferred)
Ready To Start Plunger — A non-preferred term for 'right away plunger'. (Non-preferred)
Realignment — The process of re-establishing the track to the design horizontal and vertical alignment for tangents and curves.
Rear — Alternative term for Approach To. (Overseas)
REB — Abbreviated term for 'relocatable equipment building'. (Overseas)
Reballasting — The process for replacing or adding additional ballast to the existing ballast.
Reciprocal Locking — The provision of locking between functions to ensure that conditions cannot be broken down, that is if 1 locks 2, then 2 must lock 1. This form of locking is provided automatically by mechanical interlocking. (Overseas)
Recording — Collecting data and documenting an event (rail occurrences or within the rail corridor)
Red (aspect) — Displayed by a colour light signal, indicates to the driver to stop at that signal.
Red Bond — A traction return cable which, if disconnected, could result in either the bond itself or the equipment to which it was connected rising to a dangerously high potential. The bond is identified by red colour. (Regional, AU)
Red Card — A card placed in the waybill clip of a wagon to notify all concerned that that particular vehicle is NOT fit for traffic and must be repaired prior to returning to traffic. (Overseas)
Reduced Overlap — An overlap that is shorter than the minimum permitted length of a full overlap, where the permitted approach speed is below a specified level which still allows an unrestricted approach to a signal at danger. (Overseas)
Reefer — U.S. slang for a refrigerated wagon. A box wagon with insulated walls, roof and floor, with or without provision for the application of refrigeration equipment. Sometimes used to refer to refrigerated containers. (Overseas)
Reflective Delineators — Reflectors or reflective decals / sheeting.
Refrigerated Wagon — A box wagon with insulated walls, roof and floor, with or without provision for the application of refrigeration equipment.
Refuge Loop — A running line with entry and exit ends connected to a main line, that is used to hold a train or track vehicle to allow other rail traffic to cross or pass.
Regulating — The mechanical process of forming the ballast to the standard track profile.
Reflective Delineators — Reflectors or reflective decals / sheeting.
Regulator — Related Term: Rail Safety Regulator 
Release — A device that allows a Competent Worker to take trackside control of points or signals by the removal of locking on a function, for example, the removal of route locking or the unlocking of a function such as a ground frame.
Release Speed — The calculated speed of a train approaching a signal at which the signal is permitted to clear to a less restrictive aspect. (Overseas)
Releasing Switch — An electric lock located adjacent to a ground frame which when energised enables a switch to be turned to release a key to unlock the ground frame. The releasing switch is interlocked with the signalling. (Regional, AU)
Reliability — The ability of an item of equipment or a system to perform a required function under stated conditions for a stated period of time or at a given point in time.
Relief Point — A nominated crew change location.
Relief Train — Is a breakdown or other train, locomotive or locomotives coupled proceeding to clear an obstruction or assist a disabled train. (Regional, AU)
Remote Control Override — An alternate, simpler system provided to keep traffic moving in the event of failure of electronic remote control equipment whereby certain signal routes can be set to automatic operation. (Regional, AU)
Remote Controlled — A block station where the switches and signals are controlled from a location remote from that block station. (Regional, AU)
Remote Controlled Location — A location where signals and/or points are controlled by a Competent Worker at another location.
Remote Controlled Signalling (RCS) — A system of safeworking where rail traffic movements are regulated by signals usually controlled from a remote location and/or automatically by the passage of rail traffic. (Regional, AU)
Removable Exit Window — A removal system where the emergency window glazing is hinged opened, or removed as a complete integral unit.
Renewal — means any major substitution work on a subsystem or part subsystem which does not change the overall performance of the subsystem.
Repeater — A device conveying information as to the condition of an operated unit. (Overseas)
Repeater Signal — An alternative term for an Indicator (in a signal box). A signal provided at some locations to give rail traffic crew better information about the indication of the next signal. (Regional, AU)
Replacement Switch — A switch or button located in the signal box that enables the signaller to replace an automatic Signal to danger. The signal is proved to be at red and alight. Also see Emergency Replacement Switch. (Overseas)
REPOS — Abbreviation for 'road environment percentage occurrence spectrum'. 
Reserve (railway) — The area of land intended for a specific purpose, e.g. pedestrian, railway.
Resetting — Placing equipment or systems (for example axle counters) into a state which is suitable for restoration to service.
Residual Risk — Risk remaining after risk treatment.
Resilient Rail Fastening — A fastening that provides a degree of elasticity between the sleeper and rail with the aim of avoiding the loosening of the fastening due to vibration, as well as enhancing the ability of the fastening system to resist longitudinal creep forces and buckling forces associated with continuously welded rail (CWR).
Resleepering — The process of replacing existing sleepers with new or serviceable sleepers.
Resonated Impedance Bond — An impedance bond provided with a secondary winding, connected to a capacitor, to increase the impedance of the bond to track circuit currents.
Restoration To Service — Accepting reset equipment or systems back into service. (Overseas)
Restrain — To prevent movement of rail traffic with signals, signalling equipment, blocking facilities, or the issue of a written warning.
Restraint Authority — The Restraint Authority directs rail traffic not to depart the location irrespective of any available Proceed Authority.
Restricted Speed — Restricted speed is a speed that allows rail traffic to stop short of an obstruction within half the distance of clear track that is visible ahead. Restricted speed must not exceed 25 km/h.
RETB — Radio Electronic Token Block 
Return Conductor — A conductor attached to the overhead traction wiring equipment structures that carries return traction current. (Regional, AU)
Reverse (function) — Position of a lever (or switch) when it is pulled fully in the lever frame (or operated). (Overseas)
Reverse (points) — The opposite position to normal (points). (Overseas)
Reverse Contact — A term used to designate a current carrying contact when the operating mechanism is in the reverse position. (Regional, AU)
Reverse Curve — A curve comprising successive and closely spaced curves in opposite directions. It is usual to connect reverse curves with a straight.
Reversible Line — Non-preferred term for a Bi-directional Line. (Non-preferred)
Right Angle Crossing — A crossing where rails intersect at approximately 90 degrees.
Right Away Hand Signal — An indication given to a train crew that passengers have left or boarded the train safely. (Regional, AU)
Right Of Way — The whole of the land contained within the boundaries of the railway reserve.
Right Running Direction — The normal direction of travel on unidirectional lines.
RIM — Rail Infrastructure Manager 
Riser Block — A block within the flangeway which incorporates ramps and a plateau for the purpose of elevating a wheel tread over a gap.
RISSB — Abbreviation for 'Rail Industry Safety and Standards Board'. The Rail Industry Safety and Standards Board (RISSB) is wholly owned by its funding members and is responsible for the development and management of rail industry standards, rules, codes of practice and guidelines.
Road — The term used to describe a designated rail track within the terminal area or shunting yard. The term 'to make a road' refers to the setting of points, signals etc and the clearing of detail devices so that a particular track path is clear for rail traffic.
Road Rail Vehicle — A road vehicle fitted with retractable rail guidance wheels. Also see 'hi-rail vehicle'.
Rockfall Detector — A detector installed to detect large objects falling from a cliff or slope above the track and operated when trip wires between fixed points are broken or stretched. Used to raise alarms and/or place protecting signals to stop. (Regional, AU)
Rodding — The rods connecting a remote point operating lever and the points. (Regional, AU)
Roll By Inspection — A visual inspection of moving rail traffic to identify equipment, loading security or other defects or failure. (Regional, AU)
Roller Bearings — Bearings using rolling elements between the moving load-bearing surfaces (cylindrical, spherical and taper rollers).
Rolling Brand (rail) — A brand rolled into the centreline of the web of the rail in raised letters and numerals. It indicates the rail manufacturer and month and year of manufacture. Australian Standard rails are also branded with the year of the Australian Standard to which the rail conforms. The rolling brand is repeated several times on a standard rail length.
Rolling Stock — Any vehicle that operates on, or intends to operate on, or uses a railway track, including any loading on such a vehicle, but excluding a vehicle designed for both on- and off-track use when not operating on the track. Rolling stock is a collective term for a large range of rail vehicles of various types, including locomotives, freight wagons, passenger cars, track machines and road-rail vehicles.
Rolling Stock Gauge — Related Term: Rolling Stock Outline 
Rolling Stock Operation — Includes provision, maintenance or movement of rolling stock.
Rolling Stock Operator — means a person who has effective control and management of the operation or movement of rolling stock on rail infrastructure for a railway, but does not include a person by reason only that the person drives the rolling stock or controls the network or the network signals;
Rolling Stock Outline — A generic term for the three-dimensional size of a railway vehicle including its movements that consists of three specific parts, the static outline, kinematic outline and swept outline.
Rolling Stock Provider — A person provides rolling stock if the person, as part of an undertaking carried on by him, her or it, designs, constructs, maintains, repairs or alters the rolling stock.
Rolling Stock Standards — Rail Infrastructure Managers specified requirements for rail traffic to operate on the Network
Rollover — Type of derailment mechanism where the rolling stock rolls over onto its side, pivoting about the wheels on that side.
Rotary Contact — Contact where the moving contact piece is a conductive segment on a rotary drum which turns to bring the segment into contact with the fixed contact piece.
Route — The path from one limit of authority to the next in the direction of travel.
Route Control System Interlocking — A system whereby a route is set and the signal leading over it is cleared by the signaller operating a route setting button or buttons. Two types are in use, one being the 'Entrance-Exit' or 'Push-Push' type whereby the signaller operates one push-button at the commencement and a second at the finish of the route. The other is the 'one control switch' (OCS) type whereby a separate switch or push-button is provided for each route on a signal and the signaller operates the switch or push-button for the route required. The interlocking between routes may be relay interlocking or computer based interlocking. (Regional, AU)
Route Indicator — An indicator working in conjunction with a signal indication. It is provided at the divergence of two or more lines, and indicates to the driver the route to be taken by the train. (Regional, AU)
Route Lever (one Way) — Route lever (or push-button) which, once operated, returns immediately to normal and which is to be moved in the same way whether a route is to be established or released. (Regional, AU)
Route Locking — A form of interlocking which maintains the locking associated with a route in use until after the train has passed clear of the equipment being locked (for example, points or opposing signal). The release may be effective only after a time delay. (Overseas)
Route Setting — A system in which all points in a route are set to the required positions, and the signal at the entrance to the route cleared by the operation of one or two control functions. (Overseas)
Route Signalling — System of signalling in which the signals indicate the state of occupancy and conditions on the track ahead, and the route which the train is authorised to follow. (Regional, AU)
RSRP — Abbreviated term for 'Rail Safety Regulators Panel'. 
RSSB — Abbreviation for 'Railway Safety and Standards Board' for the UK railways. 
RTC — Rail Traffic Crew 
RTG — Rubber Tyred Gantry 
RTO — Rail Transport Operator
Rubber Tyred Gantry (RTG) — An overhead crane spanning one or more rail tracks and roadway to allow transfer of loading from a road vehicle, or a rail wagon. Often referred to as a Straddle Crane.
Ruling Grade — The steepest grade on the route that limits the through load permitted to be hauled by the respective classes of locomotives. (Regional, AU)
Run — A sequence of trips assigned to be worked by a particular set of rollingstock (Regional, AU)
Run Through — A movement through trailing points set in the wrong position. Damage to the point mechanism and switch rail usually results. (Overseas)
Running Direction — See Right Running Direction; 'wrong running direction'.
Running Edge — The side or edge of a rail or trackwork component where the inside edge of the wheel flange makes contact.
Running Inspection — An inspection of a train prior to the start of its journey to ensure no faults are found. (Regional, AU)
Running Line — A line (other than a siding) that is used for the through movement of rail traffic.
Running Move Derailment — The derailment of rail traffic occuring in the normal forward movement which has been authorised to depart and has commenced its journey to operate on a running line.
Running Movement — Any movement on running lines authorised by a proceed authority (PA).
Running Repairs — Minor repairs carried out on Rolling Stock without removing them from service.
Running Signal — A fixed signal placed near a running line to authorise and control running movements between one signal and the next.
Running Surface — The crown or top surface of a rail or trackwork component which supports the wheel tread.
Safe Braking Distance — A distance indicated to rail traffic crew that would allow rail traffic to stop with the application of normal service braking.
Safe Distance — A distance between workers and equipment and exposed electrical wires and equipment that an Rail Infrastructure Manager deems as safe.
Safe Place — 1. A place where workers and equipment cannot be struck by rail traffic. 2. A Safe Place is a place where no track worksite protection is provided and is either: - a properly constructed refuge to an approved design; - behind the safety line on a platform; - a place where a structure or physical barrier has been erected to provide protection but includes subways and overhead bridges; - a place that is not on or near the track.
Safe System Of Work — Formal method of work devised from taking account of all likely sources of danger to provide for the safety of those involved, affected by, or in the vicinity of the work.
Safety Action — An action which is proposed or has been taken to address a particular safety deficiency which has come to light during an investigation. (Overseas)
Safety Assessment — A process to determine whether the system/product meets the specified safety requirements and to form a judgement as to whether the system/product is fit for its intended purpose in relation to safety.
Safety Case — A formal presentation of evidence, arguments and assumptions aimed at providing assurance that a system, product or other change to the railway has met its safety requirements and that the safety requirements are adequate.
Safety Critical — Directly influencing safety (when applied to equipment or systems).
Safety Critical Worker — A worker whose action or inaction may lead directly to a serious incident affecting the public or the rail network.
Safety Culture — The product of individual and group values, attitudes, perceptions, competencies and patterns of behaviour that determine commitment to, and the style and proficiency of, an organisation's health and safety management.
Safety Data Register — The list of key safety-related characteristics of a particular (class of) rolling stock as listed in the AS 7500 series of Australian Rolling Stock Standards.
Safety Deficiency — Any situation related to the operation or management of the railway system that can reasonably be regarded as having the potential to adversely affect the safety of railway operations.
Safety Integrity — The probability of a safety-related system performing its required safety function under the required conditions and within the required time interval.
Safety Interface Agreement — An agreement between parties to manage safety risks.
Safety Management System — Any system whose primary objective is to achieve safe rail operations. Under co-regulation the Accreditation Authority has the role of defining the minimum requirement for what must be included in a specific safety management system. Rail Transport Operators, Rail Infrastructure Managers and Rail Transport Operators are free to nominate equivalent or superior standards for their safety management system.
Safety Related System — A system by which the safe operation of equipment or process is achieved, either as an integral part of the control function or as a system designed to respond to a hazardous condition independently of the control function.
Safety Related Work — (a) Driving and operation of trains. (b) Control of the movement of trains. (c) The design, construction, repair, maintenance, upgrading, inspection or testing of track, rollingstock, civil and electric traction infrastructure, and signalling and telecommunications equipment. (d) Development, design, implementation and management of safety related processes. (e) Any other duties prescribed by an organisation as safety-related work.
Safety Validation — A systematic and structured process to ensure that all risks associated with a change are identified and are reduced to as low as reasonably practicable (ALARP) before the change is implemented.
Safeworking — An integrated system of operating rules and procedures that define the interaction between workers and engineered systems for the safe operation of a railway.
Safeworking Breach — A departure from safeworking procedures which could compromise safety.
Sameness — the measure of being one or identical, though having different names, aspects, etc.
SAS — Section Authority System 
SCADA — Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition system 
SCADA System — A supervisory control and data acquisition telemetry system. (Regional, AU)
Scarf — The position on a crossing where a (Scarf) rail joins into a machined notch in the nose rail.
Scarf Rail — The rail forming a V which joins the nose rail at the machined notch. Also referred to as the male half of vee.
Scheduling — Scheduling is the process of co-ordinating arrival and departure times for train services at the beginning, intermediate and destination locations of a journey. This scheduling meets the requirements of individual railway operators, their customers and the integration of other planned and unplanned requirements such as maintenance.
Scheme Plan — A longitudinal scaled or dimensioned track layout plan that is produced to depict new or altered signalling systems.
Scissor (crossover) — Two intersecting crossovers. (Regional, AU)
SCOTI — Abbreviated term for 'Standing Committee of Transport and Infrastructure'. 
SCOTI Rail Group — Sub-committee of the 'Standing Committee of Transport and Infrastructure'. 
Screwspike — A threaded fastener used to attach plates to sleepers. 
SCT — Specialised Container Transport 
Sealed Release — An emergency release which requires a seal to be broken prior to operation. (Overseas)
Seamless — without knowledge of change occurring
Searchlight Signal — A colour light signal that can display red, yellow and green aspects from a single optical assembly. Modern forms employ LED or fibre optic technology; heritage types change aspect by placing separate coloured lenses in front of a single lamp. (Overseas)
Seat Utilisation — A measure of the total number of passengers per train divided by the total seating. (Regional, AU)
Section — The line between the departure end yard limit of one location and the arrival end yard limit of another location. A section consists of one or more blocks.
Section Authority System (SAS) Territory — The portions of line where the Section Authority System of Safeworking is used. (Non-preferred)
Section Insulator — Insulation introduced into the contact/catenary wires between two electrical subsections of overhead line equipment, arranged so that the pantographs may pass from one subsection to the other smoothly and without break of electrical contact whilst still providing isolation between the subsections.
Section Running Time — The train running time between one block station and the block station in advance.
Section Signal — A stop signal controlling the entrance to a block section or intermediate block section ahead. Also see Accept/home Signal, Starting Signal and Advanced Starting Signal. (Overseas)
Sectional Route Release Locking — Route locking, the action of which ceases on those points over which the train has run and on the corresponding protecting points. (Regional, AU)
Secure — To place and keep something in a known or prepared place or position to safeguard it against accidental or unauthorised access or movement.
Secure Power Supply — A power supply system that can be relied upon to keep certain safety-critical signalling functions operating for a predetermined minimum time, in the event of a total incoming supply failure. (Overseas)
Security — Protection of persons, property and railway operation by means of arrangements to reduce the risk of harm from criminal acts of other parties such as theft, assault, sabotage and terrorism.
Selection — The logic by which signals are allowed to show a proceed indication only when all conditions have been satisfied. (Regional, AU)
Self-normalising Points — Points which are automatically returned to the normal position after rail traffic movement.
Self-propelled Passenger Rolling Stock — Non-locomotive hauled passenger-carrying rolling stock, e.g. multiple unit trains and rail motors.
Semaphore Signal — A signal which informs a driver by means of the position of a mechanical arm during daylight and by coloured lights during darkness.
Semi-automatic Signal (or 'controlled Automatic Signal') — A fixed signal which can be controlled by a signaller but which can also be switched to 'automatic'. When the signal is in 'automatic', it is operated by the location of train over track circuits on the departure side of the signal. (Regional, AU)
Sense And Brake Unit — End of train device which forms part of the end of train monitoring system (ETMS). Sends a signal to the in-cab integrated function display (IFD). (Regional, AU)
Sequential Interlocking — Interlocking which compels a certain sequential order in the working of the levers. (Regional, AU)
Sequential Locking — Locking applied to successive running signals to enforce the replacement of one lever (arm or aspect) before the lever controlling the signal in rear is free to be pulled. This locking is non-reciprocal and may be performed electrically or mechanically. (Overseas)
Series Bonding — The fail safe method of bonding track circuits with rail sections connected in series, such that a single failure results in the track circuit showing occupied. (Overseas)
Series/parallel Bonding — The bonding of one rail of a turnout as series bonding and the other rail of the turnout as parallel bonding. (Regional, AU)
Service Braking Distance — The distance to stop a train under normal braking, when travelling at its maximum permissible speed for the line, and with regard to the performance capability of the train and its location.
Service Period — The period of time in service use until scheduled withdrawal for the next overhaul.
Service Provider — An organisation contracted to an operator to provide locomotives, wagons and crews or other service to enable the operation of the train on the network.
Serviceable Material — Previously used or part worn material which is suitable for re-use.
Set (points) — Refers to the interlocking function which controls the movement of the points to their correct position. Successful completion of the setting process results in correspondence. (Overseas)
Set Back — To move in the reverse direction to that provided in the current proceed authority.
Set In Rail — A permanent sharp bend or curve in a rail.
Set To Work Test — This is not a certification test but part of the process of setting the equipment to work correctly. It is the initial powering up of the signalling circuitry and local apparatus at a relay room or location case to test that it is able to carry out its function correctly. (Regional, AU)
Setting — The interlocking function controlling the movement of points or other moveable components to the correct position. (Regional, AU)
SFAIRP — Indicates that a statement is mandatory.
Shell Mounted Plug In Relay — A conversion unit which directly replaces a shelf type relay. Once installed, any further relay replacement is by replacing the plug in relay portion of the assembly. (Regional, AU)
Shelf Type Relay — A relay designed for installation on a shelf or other flat surface. The electrical connections are made to individual terminals on its top surface. (Regional, AU)
Shielding Impedance Track Circuit — A series resistor, parallel inductance impedance unit inserted in a single rail 50 Hertz AC track relay circuit to limit, divert and prevent traction return DC current affecting the AC track relay. (Regional, AU)
Short Welded Rail — Track where the rail is welded into lengths less than 110m, with the rail lengths joined by mechanical joints.
Should — Indicates a recommendation.
Shunt — To move rail traffic, rakes of vehicles or vehicles on lines for purposes other than through movements.
Shunt Authority — An Authority for rail traffic to move and occupy a block for the purpose of shunting. (Regional, AU)
Shunt Locomotive — 1. A locomotive used solely for movement of vehicles in a yard or terminal; 2. A locomotive assigned to shunting duties.
Shunter — A Competent Worker who directs train movements for amalgamation, division or altering train consists.
Shunting Movements — Any movement authorised by a Proceed Restricted Authority (PRA), Work Authority (WA) or Shunt Authority (SHA).
Shunting Sensitivity — The shunting sensitivity of a track circuit is expressed in terms of its drop shunt value. (Regional, AU)
Shunting Signal — A fixed signal provided to authorise and control shunting movements. (Regional, AU)
Shunting Yard — A system of tracks, within defined limits, used for shunting.
Side Bearers — Brackets or assemblies on both sides of the longitudinal centre of a bogie that limit the roll of the underframe on the bogie bolster.
Side Light — A small aperture at the side of a colour light signal repeating the main aspect and giving a close-up indication. (Regional, AU)
Sighting Distance — The distance that someone can clearly see along the track.
Sighting Distance, Signals — The distance along the track where a limit of authority or warning prior to a limit of authority can be first reasonably viewed by the train crew of an approaching train, and the physical location of that limit of authority warning.
Signal — A visual display device which conveys instructions or provides prior warning of instructions regarding the driver's authority to proceed.
Signal Aspect — The displayed pattern or position of lights or arms used to give a signal indication.
Signal Backlight — A light displayed at the back of a signal to show that the aspect is illuminated.
Signal Box — The place where points, signals, interlocking apparatus or signal control panels are operated. (Regional, AU)
Signal Box Diagram — A diagrammatic representation of the area controlled by the signal box exhibited in the signal box for the guidance of the signaller. (Overseas)
Signal Box Indicator — A visual device which displays the position or condition of an item of signalling equipment. [Obsolete]
Signal Circuit Controller — Electric circuit controller, the position of which depends on that of the arm or of the target of a signal. It is used to check that signal.
Signal Head — The part of a colour light signal from which the aspects are displayed. (Regional, AU)
Signal Identification Plate — The plate attached to the signal post for unique identification of the signal. (Regional, AU)
Signal Indication — The visual indication of the position or aspect of a fixed signal.
Signal Key Switches — A specially fitted device which enables the aspect of a signal to be restricted to 'red' in the field. (Regional, AU)
Signal Number — The number associated with a signal for identification. (Regional, AU)
Signal Off — The signal displaying a proceed indication. (Regional, AU)
Signal On — The signal at stop. (Regional, AU)
Signal Passed At Danger (SPAD) — Unauthorized passing of a signal displaying a stop indication as follows: 1. completely missed; 2. driver misjudged; 3. Restored as train approached; 4. other.
Signal Position — A term used to describe indications of signals given by semaphore arms. (Regional, AU)
Signal Post Replacement Switch — A switch on or near the post of a colour light signal which enables the signal to be turned and maintained at red by means of a key. (Overseas)
Signal Post Telephone — A telephone provided at a signal, enabling the driver to communicate with the signaller, to report a fault or incident or to remind the signaller of the presence of a train detained at the signal that is displaying a danger aspect. (Overseas)
Signal Proving — Checking the aspect or the control of a signal.
Signal Repeater — An indicator, in a signal box, which indicates whether a signal is at stop or clear. (Regional, AU)
Signal Route — A section of track from a signal which provides an authority to proceed into that section up to the next signal, buffer stop, stop board, or limit of shunthood, that represents the limit of the authority to proceed.
Signal Section — A section of track between two consecutive running signals in the direction of travel.
Signal Sighting — The activity of locating a site for the placement of a signal for the purposes of optimum approach view by the driver.
Signaller — A Competent Worker who issues proceed authorities, and works points, signals and other signalling equipment usually located in a signal box, to manage routes for safe and efficient transit of rail traffic.
Signallers Route Lists — A list of all point ends and releases between the entrance-exit signals of a signalled route, showing the position to which each is required to be set. Used primarily in degraded mode operation.
Signalling And Telecommunications Infrastructure — Signalling equipment and telecommunications equipment used as part of the safeworking and operating systems of the network .
Signalling And Telecommunications System — A system which provides a means to safely regulate the movement of trains on a railway through the use of appropriate technology.
Signalling Controls — Signalling functions that control, release or are released by other signalling functions for a particular layout. signalling controls are expressed in a control table. (Overseas)
Signalling Detection System — A system that detects the presence of a train or any other on track vehicle intended to be detected on a section of track. Systems include track circuits, axle counters, treadles and global positioning systems. (Overseas)
Signalling Diagram — A term for Signal Box Diagram.
Signalling Facilities Diagram — A plan, produced at an early stage in the development of a project, showing operating requirements and infrastructure features, including the track layout, stations, level crossings. It is used as a basis for producing the scheme plan. (Overseas)
Signalling Function — A signal, set of points or other part of the train control system. (Overseas)
Signalling Plan — A longitudinally scaled or dimensioned track layout plan showing the signalling functions with their identities. It generally relates to a specific signal box control area and is a derivative of the scheme plan.
Signalling Rail — The rail of a single rail track circuit that is independent from the traction return path and is used only for the track circuit current.
Signalling System — A series of electrical, electronic, electromechanical units brought together to form a system which controls the safe movement of trains.
Signalling Workstation — The generic term used for the signallers display system.
Signals Engineer — A person with the appropriate delegated authority and signals engineering competence to make judgments about signalling safety. 
Signals Maintenance Representative — A qualified and authorised signals maintenance worker. Review. 
SIL — Abbreviated term for 'safety integrity level'. 
SIMBIOS —  Abbreviated term for 'simplified bi-directional signalling'.
Similar Flexure — Preferred A turnout on a curve where the direction of the turnout diverging move is the same as for the curve.
Similarity — Preferred having likeness or resemblance, especially in a general way
Simple Curve — Preferred A curve with single radius connecting two straight lengths.
Simplified Bi-directional Signalling (SIMBIOS) — (Overseas) Bi-directional signalling where the signalling in the opposite direction to normal traffic provides for a lower speed and/or capacity than that in the normal direction, and bi-directional operation is only required in connection with possessions or emergencies affecting the other line(s).
Single Aspect — (Overseas) A colour light signal capable of displaying only one aspect. This may be red (fixed red) or yellow (Fixed Distant Signal).
Single Light Signalling — (Overseas) A system of colour light signalling where the running signal indication is given by a single colour light (plus a band of three lights for a turnout indication).
Single Line — Preferred A single running line on which trains can travel in either direction.
Single Line Automatic Block Signalling (SLABS) Territory — Preferred The portions of line where the Single Line Automatic Block Signalling system of Safeworking is used
Single Line Track Block — (Overseas) A track block system of safeworking used on single lines which allows only one train to be in the section between interlockings at any one time.
Single Line Working — Preferred Rail traffic working in both directions over a single line where multiple line unidirectional operation normally applies.
Single Rail Track Circuit — (Overseas) A track circuit in which one rail is dedicated for signalling purposes and contains insulated joints, the other rail being used as the common traction return current and signalling current rail.
Single Track — Preferred A line that consists mostly of only one track where only one train is able to travel/oass at one time.
Single Yellow (aspect) — Preferred Displayed by a colour light signal, informs the driver to expect the next main signal to be at Stop.
Single-slip Points — (Overseas) A combination of a crossing and single connecting track, located within the limits of the crossing, and made up of a right-hand switch from the other track, which unite to form the connecting track without additional crossings.
Single-unit (SU) Vehicle — (Overseas) A vehicle designed to operate as a stand-alone vehicle, with a drivers compartment and control unit at one or both ends.
Skeletal Wagon — (Overseas) A wagon whose only longitudinal load bearing structure between the bogies is the centre sill. The load support structure consists of lateral members attached to the centre sill.
SL Lock — (Overseas) A general safeworking padlock with keys held by authorised operations and engineering staff.
Slab Track — Preferred Track fixed with fixation assemblies to a concrete slab under the rails.
SLABS —  Single Line Automatic Block Signalling
Sleepers are bearers used to hold the rail in place at the correct gauge and to transmit loads through the ballast to the formation. They have traditionally been made of wood but are gradually being replaced by concrete or steel sleepers. — Preferred 
Sleeper — Preferred A device capable of detecting track instability, and operated when the distance over the ground increases between two fixed points being monitored. The detector is used to raise alarms and/or place protecting signals to stop.
Slip Detector — (Overseas) The freight carrying space on a wagon required to carry a standard 6.1 metre (20 foot) container. Wagon sizes and train capacities are typically referred to in 'slots' or 'teus' (twenty-foot equivalent units).
Slot ID — (Overseas) A three digit identification code identifying a particular slot on a wagon.
Slotted Signal — (Overseas) This is a manually operated mechanical signal fitted with an electric device ('replacer' or 'reverser'), by means of which the signal is automatically put to the stop position by interruption of a track circuit or other controlling device.
Slotting — (Overseas) The control of a signalling function that requires co-operation between two signal boxes or other controlling points.
Slow Pick-up Relay — (Overseas) A relay which, when energy is applied, will pick up slower than an ordinary relay.
Slow Release Relay — (Overseas) A relay which, when the controlling circuit is opened or completely shunted, will drop away slower than an ordinary relay.
Snubbing Device - Electrical — (Overseas) Diode or mechanically operated contacts within the points circuitry that are employed to steer the high inductive load currents (snubbing) away from the point motor. This is in addition to the clutch mechanism.
Snubbing Device - Level Crossing Boom — (Overseas) A feature of a level crossing boom mechanism.
Snubbing Device - Rolling Stock — (Overseas) A term applied to the friction wedge damping arrangement in the suspension of a 3-piece freight bogle.
Softfit — Preferred The underside of a sleeper.
Sole Occupancy — Preferred Sole occupancy of track within defined limits.
Solebar — Preferred Main longitudinal structural member of vehicle underframe which forms the extreme edges of the frame. Also known as a 'side sill'.
Solenoid — Preferred An electromagnetic device consisting of a plunger moving inside an electromagnetic coil, used to open and close contacts in an electrical circuit or to open and close a valve in an electro-pneumatic or hydraulic pressure line.
Solid State Interlocking (SSI) — Preferred A first generation processor based system for controlling the interlocking between points and signals, as well as communication with lineside signalling functions using a high integrity microprocessor based technology both for the central interlocking (multi-processor module - MPM) and for the trackside controls (trackside function modules - TFM's). Also see 'computer based interlocking'.
Spacing (sleeper) — Preferred The separating distance of sleepers, or rail supports on slab track, measured from the centreline of the sleepers or supports.
SPAD —  Abbreviation for 'signal passed at danger'.
Spare Lever — (не предп.) In a lever frame, a lever which is not used for the operation of any signalling equipment. Also see 'lever (worked to maintain locking)'.
Spark Gap — (Overseas) An electrical device installed at level crossings in single rail track circuit areas, which is connected between the rails on both sides of the level crossing to afford protection to the signalling equipment in the event of a fault between overhead line equipment and the signalling rail.
Special Loads Officer — (Overseas) An officer whom inspects and assesses loading to determine compliance with the prescribed loading outline, configuration, dimensions or mass limitations.
Special Locking — (Overseas) Interlocking between two movable parts occasioned by the particular position of other parts.
Special Proceed Authority (SPA) — (не предп.) A method of special working in NSW which may be used when the normal system of safeworking using proceed authorities is not available.
Special Train Notice (STN) — (Overseas) A published notice providing details of train operations or events that might affect train operations.
Special Working — (Overseas) Working rail traffic using an Alternate Proceed Authority (APA) or manual block working.
Special Signalling — (Overseas) System of signalling in which signal indications of the speed at which a train may travel, and of any speed change required.
Spike — Preferred A fastener used to attach plates and/or rails to sleepers, e.g. dogspikes, springspikes, screwspikes.
Spike Killed (sleeper Or Timber) — Preferred The condition of a sleeper or timber in which dog spikes or screw spikes have been previously inserted whereby there is insufficient sound wood available in the region of the rail flange or sleeper plate for further installation of spikes.
Splay Rail — (Overseas) A rail outside the running rails placed at the start of an internal guard rail used to direct a derailed wheel to the correct side of a guard rail.
Split Detection — (Overseas) The proof and indication of the position of multiple ended sets of points, individually for each point end.
Spreader Bar — Preferred Bars used to hold the points in the correct position relative to each other.
Spring Points — Preferred Points equipped with a spring device which forces the point switches to their original position after being trailed through and holds them under spring compression.
Springspike — Preferred A fastener used to attach sleeper plates to sleepers on clip fastened track. The spike comprises two leaves from one piece of spring steel, folded to produce a square shank and an eye.
Spur (track Circuit) — (Overseas) A section of running rail required to be electrically common to a series bonded rail, but which is not itself series bonded.
SSAI —  System Safety Accident Investigation
SSAI Investigation — Preferred A standard method of investigation known as 'system safety accident investigation'.
SSI —  Solid State Interlocking
Stable — Preferred To leave rail traffic unattended and secured, usually in a siding.
Staff — (Overseas) The token (usually a rod) used in a train staff system, the possession of which gives the train permission to enter a block section.
Staff And Ticket Territory — Preferred The portions of line where the Staff and Ticket system of Safeworking is used.
Staff Station — (Overseas) An interlocking which is provided in order to work the staff and ticket or electric train staff system.
Staff Ticket — Preferred A written authority issued after a rail traffic crew has seen the staff for a section.
Stageworks — (Overseas) The phased installation and commissioning of signalling equipment, as part of a large resignalling scheme, often of a temporary nature as alterations proceed.
Stakeholders — Preferred Those people and organizations who may affect, be affected by a decision or activity.
Standard — Preferred An authorised document, including specification, procedure, instruction, directive, rule or regulation, which may set mandatory requirements.
Standard Gauge — Preferred The name given to the gauge of track of 1435mm (4'8)
Standard Length Rail — Preferred The common length of rail supplied by the manufacturer.
Standardisation — Preferred to cause (something) to conform to a standard or to adopt (something) as one's standard
Standing Room — Preferred The distance along the track between points of minimum allowable clearance where rolling stock is permitted to stand.
Starting Signal — (Overseas) A controlled signal which, when cleared, gives the driver authority to enter the section provided that, where required, the driver is in possession of the authority for the section.
Static Clearance (electrical) — (Overseas) The safe distance between the earthed materials of any structure and the live parts of the overhead line equipment, under all permissible conditions and tolerances.
Static Outline — Preferred An outline drawing or specification of a notional vehicle cross-section which prescribes maximum permissible rolling stock dimensions under specified conditions of load and suspension displacements in vertical directions. The static outline will have an associated kinematic outline and swept outline.
Static Switch Power Supply — Preferred An all electronic emergency changeover device for power supplies.
Station Protection System — Preferred A system that alerts the driver to stations and other trackside features via the use of track magnets.
Station Yard — Preferred All tracks at a station protected by signals or yard limit boards.
Stick — (Non-preferred) A term often used to describe a function which stores or remembers specific conditions of the signalling equipment.
Stick - Non-stick Semi-automatic Signal — (Non-preferred) This is a signal which will operate automatically as long as all contacts (including manually controlled contacts) other than track relay contacts, affecting its control, are closed.
Stick - Semi-automatic Signal — (Non-preferred) This is a signal which will not automatically assume the warning or clear aspect after it has been put to stop by interruption of the track circuit, until its manually operated control has been restored to the normal position and reversed again.
Stick - Semi-stick Semi-automatic Signal — (Non-preferred) This is a signal which will not automatically assume the warning or clear aspect after it has been put to stop by interruption of the track circuit, until a manually operated control, other than its own direct control, has been restored to the normal position.
Stick Circuit — (Overseas) A term applied to a circuit used to maintain a relay or similar unit energised through its own contact. Signalling relay control circuits may include approach sticks (re: approach locking), route sticks (re: route locking), direction sticks (re: direction proving), track sticks (re: signal control relay down proving), and/or lever sticks (re: reclearing of a controlled signal after train passage).
STN —  Special Train Notice
Stock Rail — Preferred The rail to which a point fits up against in the closed position. A switch set is made up of the point and stock rails and associated components. The term is also sometimes used loosely to describe other plain rail sections in a points and crossings structure.
Stop Block — (не предп.) A structure fixed at the termination of a running line or siding to arrest slow-moving vehicles.
Stop Light — Preferred Light indicating a brake application.
Stop Sign — (Overseas) A safeworking notice board inscribed 'stop', at which all trains must stop and must not pass until authorised.
Stop Signal — (Overseas) Any signal capable of showing a danger aspect.
Stopping Place — (Overseas) A designated location, next to the line and is a stopping place for the setting down or picking up of passengers or personnel.
Stored Control — Preferred Pre-setting control acting on several units, the movements of which are carried out successively.
Straddle Crane —  See Cantry Crane.
Straight-ahead Route — (Overseas) The non-diverging (and usually the fastest) route from a junction signal.
Stress Free Temperature — Preferred Actual temperature at which there are no temperature induced stresses in the rail.
Stretcher — (Overseas) A bar connecting the two switch rails in a point end, keeping them in the correct position relative to each other.
Structure Bond — Preferred A bond connecting the steelwork of an overhead line structure, bridge, or other metal structure to the traction earth. This bond is provided to prevent the rise of hazardous voltages on structures and steelwork.
Structure Clearance Register — Preferred A register of all structures that have been built inside the structure outline standard for the line section and therefore require to be part of a formal inspection and assessment process.
Structure Defects — Preferred The register should detail the structure location and type, and the clearance standards required at the location.
Structure Gauge Related Term: Structure Outline — Preferred Defects in civil or electrical infrastructure items which have the potential to cause accidents unless urgent corrective action is taken.
Structure Outline — Preferred The desired minimum outline for structures along a route.
SU —  Single Unit
Sub-surface Railway Station — (Overseas) A railway station to which members of the public have access and of which more than 50% of any one platform is within a tunnel or under a building.
Subsidiary Signal — (Overseas) An additional small semaphore or light signal provided below a running signal for the purpose of controlling shunting movements and movements onto occupied tracks.
Substation — Preferred A place (including substations, traction substations, transformer rooms, switchrooms, sectioning huts, pole-mounted or pad-mounted transformers) containing high-voltage electrical equipment.
Subsystem — Preferred means the whole or, as the context requires, part of a subdivision of the rail system
Sufficient Warning Time — Preferred The minimum time needed for workers to react to a Lookout’s warning and move themselves and equipment to a safe place; should include time for the Lookout’s reaction and a margin for safety
Sum L/V Axle — Preferred Sum of the absolute values of the individual wheel L/V of both wheels on the same axle at a given instant in time.
Superelevation —  The height difference, at a common location, between the running surface of both rails. Also known as Superelevation or Cross Level.
Superior Train Order Station — (Overseas) An attended train order crossing station protected by fixed signals.
Supplementary Detector — (Overseas) An additional device for detection of points in association with supplementary drives.
Supplementary Drive — (Overseas) An additional drive connected to the switch rails of a set of points at a position closer to the crossing than the switch tips.
Supply Substation — Preferred A compound containing electrical switchgear, transformers and equipment to which main supplies from the supply authority are brought and from which the feeder station is fed.
Suppression (AWS Or TPWS) — Preferred Inhibition of the operation of automatic warning system (AWS) or train protection and warning system (TPWS) track equipment for movements to which it does not apply.
Surface Concrete Troughing — (Overseas) A series of lidded troughs, usually laid in the cess, comprising a cable route.
Surge Protection — Preferred Equipment and systems for protecting electrical operating systems from transient electrical overload conditions due to external influences such as lightning, power supply switching, fault conditions.
Suspend — Preferred Practice used in some Networks when a work on track authority is suspended and then reinstated at a later time.
Swage Lock Fastening — Preferred A high tensile strength mechanical fastening system employing swaging of a collar onto annular locking grooves of a fastening utilising a special hydraulic tool. The system is designed to provide consistent and predictable installed values of tension.
Sway — Preferred The displacement of any point on the vehicle body in a direction parallel to the plane of the rails that arises as a result of a combination of lateral displacement and roll displacement of the vehicle suspension.
Swept Outline — Preferred The swept outline is a two-dimensional cross-section for the vehicle that consists of the kinematic outline plus the inner and outer curve throw produced by the vehicle on a 100m radius curve.
Swept Path — Preferred The swept path is the generic name for the 3-dimensional shape of the vehicle on any radius curve made up from the kinematic outline plus the inner and outer curve throws produced by the vehicle on that curve.
Swing Crossing —  Related Term: Switchable Vee
Swing Nose Crossing —  Related Term: Switchable Vee
Swing Test — Preferred A physical test whereby the underframe or bogie is yawed to a particular position that replicates the rolling stock negotiating a nominated track geometry.
Swinging Overlaps — (Overseas) The ability to maintain the overlap free of locking where there are facing points and a choice of overlap exists, thus enabling late selection of the overlap while the train is approaching. Usually associated with time of operation locking and conditional locking requirements.
Switch —  Refer to 'point'.
Switch Blade —  See Point Switch.
Switch Diamond — (Overseas) A type of diamond crossing with movable switches in place of fixed crossings (points). Also known as 'moveable angles' or 'moveable elbows'.
Switch Lever — (Overseas) A spring loaded lever connected by rods to the toe of a switch to enable manual changing of the switch position in yards or sidings.
Switch Machine —  See Point Machine.
Switch Rail — (Overseas) The moving portion of rail on each side of a set of points.
Switchable Vee — (Overseas) Vee designed to switch against the stock rail to eliminate the flangeway gap between the conventional fixed nose vee and the stock rail. A 'V' crossing with movable points to facilitate a high turnout speed. Also known as Swing Crossing or Swing Nose Crossing.
Switched K Crossing — Preferred A 'K' crossing with movable points.
Switches And Crossings — (не предп.) The generic term used (sometimes points and crossings) to represent all the ironwork associated with a set of points. It covers switch goes, switch rails, heels of switch rails, closure rails, stock rails, crossings and check rails.
System — Preferred a combination of interacting elements organised to achieve one or more stated purposes.
System Of Safeworking — Preferred An integrated system of operating procedures and engineered systems used in the Network, for safe operation of rail traffic, and protection of people and property. Includes Double Line CTC, Single Line CTC or Train Order Working.
System Operational Notice — (Overseas) A notice of information and instructions, authorised and issued by the train operations manager and distributed electronically or by hard copy to relevant rail staff.
Systemic Safety Deficiency — Preferred A safety deficiency which is present throughout all or a substantial part of the railway organisation and is not simply a localised problem.
Table Of Signal Routes — (Overseas) A comprehensive list of signal routes. They can either be shown on, or accompany signalling / scheme plans.
Tail Flashing Level Crossing — (Overseas) The term used to describe the effect on single lines of a level crossing warning system continuing to operate as the tail of the train departs, as if it were an opposite direction approaching train. It may occur in some systems with a light engine or other short, fast, self-propelled vehicle.
Tail Light — Preferred Red lights used to designate the end of rail traffic. (see also 'end-of-train marker').
Take-off Rail — Preferred A structure used to give track vehicles entry to and exit from the line.
Takeoff — (Overseas) Staging (usually a number of sleepers) beside the track for the purpose of removing and stabling track mounted maintenance vehicles or equipment clear of train movements.
Tamping — Preferred The process by which ballast is packed around the sleepers of a track to ensure the correct alignment for the location, speed and curvature of the line.
Tang (crossing) — Preferred The cast extension at the V end of a rail bound manganese crossing to which the heel rails are fastened.
Tangent Point (TP) — Preferred The intersecting point of track centreline tangents between curves, transitions and straight track.
Tangent Track — Preferred Straight track with no applied cant.
Tangential Point Switch — Preferred A design of points where the stocktail forms a tangent to the curve through the point switch.
Tangential Turnout — Preferred Turnout where one route is straight track.
Tank Wagon — (Overseas) A wagon comprising a horizontal, basically cylindrical container for the transport in bulk of liquids, compressed gases, granular or pelletised solids, etc.
Taper Base (sleeper Plate) — Preferred A sloped base rail seat. The taper of open (Railway) track sleeper plates is 1 in 20 to provide a rail inclination into the gauge of the track.
Tappet — (Overseas) A device, usually a notched metal bar, which actuates the mechanical locking of a mechanical interlocking machine by the movement of the lever.
Tare Mass — Preferred The mass of the rolling stock in the lightest condition under which it will be operated. This includes provisioning with sand and water but fuelled to no more than one-third of capacity.
Tautliner — (Overseas) Brand name often used to refer to a curtain sided wagon. A box wagon in which the side walls consist entirely or predominantly of weather-proof flexible panels.
TCS —  Train Control System
Technically Competent Authority — Preferred A company or person having proven competence in the particular technology or process in which they are providing technical expertise.
Telemetry System — (Overseas) Equipment for multiplexing control and/or indication inputs for transmission over a telecommunications bearer or radio link. The messages for transmission are encoded and decoded by the telemetry equipment at the ends of the transmission line. Multiplexing may be Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) or Frequency Division Multiplexing (EDM). Used for remote control from a central office location to one or more field stations.
Temporary Accreditation — Preferred The Administrating Authority may grant interim accreditation to an applicant to permit activities such as; (a) site preparation; (b) restoration or repair work; (c) testing of railway track or other infrastructure; Or for other purposes considered appropriate by the administrating authority.
Temporary Rail Joint — Preferred Non-welded rail joints intended for temporary joining of rails only, and generally requiring special measures to be implemented with their use. These measures permit the short-term passage of trains and may include special inspections or speed restrictions.
Temporary Speed Restriction (TSR) — Preferred An imposed reduction of the normal speed for a portion of track.
Temporary Speed Restriction Ahead Sign — Preferred A temporary speed ahead sign with a speed plate and distance metreage attached to warn rail traffic crew of the speed at which trains are to travel over the next portion of the line which may be unsafe at normal speed.
Temporary Traction Bond — Preferred An insulated cable fitted with rail clamps at eachend used to temporarily bridge gaps in the traction rail.
Tense (rail) —  See Destress.
Terminal Line — Preferred A dead end line.
Test —  Swing Nose Crossing.
TEU —  Twenty Foot Equivalent Unit
TGSI —  Tactile Ground Surface indicator
Thermit (weld) —  A trade name for an aluminothermic weld.
Third Rail Crossingwork — Preferred Crossingwork arranged to permit broad and standard gauge traffic to turn out or transfer on one common rail. The units include fixed points and transfers and require no points operation equipment.
Third Rail Track — Preferred Trackwork comprising three rail arranged to permit both broad and standard gauge traffic. One rail is common to both gauges. Review
Third Rail Transfer — Preferred Third rail crossingwork, without moving parts, which transfers the common rail from one side of the track to the other side.
Third Rail Turnout — Preferred A crossingwork assembly arranged to permit both broad and standard gauge traffic on the straight or through but only one gauge to turnout.
Three Aspect Block — Preferred Related Term: 3 Aspect Block
Three Piece Bogie — Preferred Conventional three-piece freight bogie based on the technical requirements of the AAR Manual Of Standards And Recommended Practices.
Three Position Signalling — Preferred Related Term: 3 Position Signalling
Three Throw (points) — Preferred Two turnouts arranged within a length of less than the sum of the separate turnout lead lengths. Also known as 'nested turnouts'.
Throat (crossing) — Preferred The position ahead of the nose(s) of a crossing between the inside edges of the wing rails at the knee or knuckle.
Through Function Test — Preferred This is a circuit function test of a circuit or series of related circuits running between locations, e.g. signal boxes, relay rooms, etc, to ensure the fuses, links and control devices effectively control the final function. It includes through function testing from a signaler's control on the operator interface to the operation of the trackside signalling equipment, and to its change-of-state indication back to the signaler's indicator diagram.
Through Movement — (Overseas) Transit or travel in the Network
Through Route Locking — Preferred Route locking, the action of which extends to all the points in a route and to the points leading to that route from the moment a train enters this route until it has completely left it.
Tie —  Alternative term for Sleeper.
Tie Bar — Preferred A rod used between rails of tracks to maintain gauge where other means are not appropriate.
Tie Plate — Preferred A long rail base plate, which ties the track gauge between each half set of points. It provides for attachment of the stock rail and a slide surface for the point switch. It is manufactured from pressed steel and is fastened to the timber.
Timber — Preferred A bearer which is used to support crossingwork assemblies.
Time Distance Curves — (Overseas) Time distance curves are employed in the planning of signal positions. The time is plotted vertically against a horizontal distance scale, and the curves indicate the position of a train at any particular time for the section of the line under consideration.
Time Limit Relay — Preferred A relay which will not close its front contacts or open its back contacts, or both, until the expiration of a definite time interval after the relay has been energised.
Time Release — (Overseas) A device used to prevent the operation of an operative unit until after the expiration of a predetermined time interval after the device has been actuated.
TOA —  Train Occupancy Authority
Toe — Preferred The machine end of a switch at which the turning out movement commences.
Toe Throw — Preferred The horizontal distance or travel at the toe of a switch from the home or closed position to the fully open position.
Token — Preferred A metal staff or a staff ticket used as the authority for rail traffic to occupy a section.
Tonnage Signal — Preferred A signal before a grade, with a sign that directs rail traffic crews, the sign may be before or fitted to the signal.
Top — Preferred Vertical alignment of the rails. Top is generally measured using the offset at a defined point along a chord of defined length. For lateral alignment see Line.
Top Event — Preferred The event classified as having the greatest adverse outcome - expressed (and detailed in OC-CI) in terms of casualties, damage or accident potential
Tourist And Heritage Railway — Preferred A railway preserved for its historical value that is not connected to another railway network, or operates independently from any other network that it is connected to.
TP —  Tangent Point
TPCS —  Train Protection and Control System
TPWS —  Train Protection and Warning System
Track — Preferred The combination of rails, rail connectors, sleepers, ballast, points, and crossings, and substitute devices where used.
Track Block System — (Overseas) A system of safeworking used on single or double lines in track-circuited areas.
Track Buckle — Preferred A substantial misalignment contributed to by longitudinal thermal stresses overcoming the lateral or vertical resistance of the track.
Track Centres — Preferred The distance between the centrelines of parallel tracks.
Track Circuit — Preferred An electric circuit where current is carried through the rails and used to detect the presence of trains. Track-circuits are used in the operation and control of points and signalling equipment.
Track Circuit Drop Shunt — (Overseas) The maximum resistance in ohms which will cause the track relay contacts to drop away when this resistance is placed between the rails of the track circuit at the most adverse shunting location.
Track Circuit Shorting Device — Preferred A device that can be applied to a line’s rails to activate track-circuits.
Track Circulted Territory — Preferred Portions of line where the system of safeworking relies on track circuits to detect the presence of rail traffic.
Track Closure — Preferred A procedure to protect against the movement of trains which are part of the normal operating service, through a section of tracks, but allow for the passage, for example, of trains and on-track vehicles under special conditions such as published in train notice.
Track Control System — (Overseas) A system of safeworking used on single or double lines in track-circulted areas (or on single lines provided with axle counting equipment).
Track Controlled Signal — (Overseas) Signals, partially or wholly controlled by track circuits, which return to their most restrictive position after a train passes.
Track Defects — Preferred Defects in the track which have the potential to cause derailment unless a speed restriction is imposed, as follows: (a) track defects involving horizontal alignment; (b) track defects involving vertical alignment; (c) broken rail; (d) other track defects.
Track Gauge — Preferred The distance between the gauge points of the rails.
Track Geometry — Preferred The horizontal and vertical alignment, cross-level and cant of the track.
Track Indicator — (Overseas) An indicator, in a signal box, which shows the signaller whether or not the portion of track-circulted line represented by that indicator is occupied by a train. At some interlockings, where only certain portions of lines are track-circulted, individual track indicators are provided. At fully track-circulted interlockings the indicators are grouped together to form a track indicator diagram.
Track Indicator Diagram — Preferred A diagram that shows if tracks are occupied, and other relevant information.
Track Junction — Preferred A crossingwork assembly which provides for diverging and crossing of tracks.
Track Locking — (Overseas) Locking of signals or points applied and maintained by the presence of trains on particular sections of track, as detected by track circuits.
Track Machine — Preferred A flange wheeled vehicle used for infrastructure maintenance, construction and inspections. Separate to freight rolling stock (e.g. wagons used for carrying rail, sleepers, spoil, ballast etc) and road-rail vehicles.
Track Magnet — Preferred Permanent or electro-magnet which under certain conditions operates by indiction induction an on apparatus on a vehicle passing by.
Track Occupancy Authority (TOA) — Preferred An authority for Competent Workers and their equipment to occupy a defined portion of track for a specified period.
Track Profile — Preferred The outline of the track in cross section in its completed condition on the formation.
Track Relay — Preferred A relay receiving all or part of its operating energy from a circuit of which the rails are the essential part, and responding to the presence of vehicles on the track.
Track Safety Awareness — Preferred Training in the risks present and safety measures necessary when a person is on or near track.
Track Section — Preferred The section of railway track between two locations specified for operating purposes. In different track networks this track element may be referred to as either a section or a block.
Track Speed — Preferred The allowed maximum speed for a portion of track.
Track Stick — (Overseas) A circuit provided to prove that a signal has returned to stop, and its signal control relays have de-energised, after the passage of a train.
Track Supervisor — Preferred A Competent Worker responsible for inspections, operations or instructions associated with the maintenance or construction of permanent way or works for a prescribed portion of the railway.
Track Vehicle — Preferred A vehicle, usually self-propelled, used for inspecting and / or maintaining infrastructure.
Track Vehicle Identification — Preferred The unique number displayed on a track vehicle.
Track Vehicle Operator — Preferred A Competent Worker controlling the movement of a track vehicle.
Track Work — Preferred Construction, maintenance or repair work on infrastructure in the Rail Corridor
Track Work Authority (TWA) — Preferred Authority for non-exclusive occupancy of track by track workers and equipment within specified limits.
Track Workers — Preferred Competent rail safety workers whose primary duties are associated with work on or around infrastructure in the Rail Corridor
Track, Ballasted — Preferred Track in which the sleepers are supported and contained by ballast.
Track, Concreted — Preferred Track in which the rails are supported and contained by concrete.
Trackside — Preferred Parts of the Infrastructure directly involved with train operations and operational safeworking.
Trackside Monitoring Equipment — Preferred Devices that monitor and respond to track, trackside and rail vehicle conditions.
Trackwork — Preferred Track, including crossingwork assemblies, with sleepers, timbers and fasteners, laid, lined or surfaced and connected with the track.
Trackwork Assembly —  Related Term: Crossingwork Assembly
Traction Bond — Preferred A bond connecting together the various items of equipment in the traction current return circuit path. It shall be assumed that this bond will be carrying traction current at all times.
Traction Current Return — Preferred The electric current returning from the overhead power supply through the rails to substations.
Traction Earth — Preferred The earth for the traction distribution system which primarily consists of the traction return rails, earth wires and overhead structures.
Traction Earth Wire — Preferred An aerial conductor used to connect a number of overhead line structures together in order to ensure that the traction earthing system continuity is appropriately maintained throughout the electrified area.
Traction Return Current — Preferred The electric current returning from the overhead power supply, via electric rail traffic, through the rails to sub-stations.
Traction Return Rail — Preferred The rail which carries the traction return current and is generally marked at intervals with blue paint on the rail web and has traction bonds connected to it. It is generally, but not always, the rail nearest to the mast.
Tractive Effort — Preferred The power that a Motive Power Unit is able to deliver to the rail through its wheels notwithstanding the ability of the wheels to grip the rail.
Trailable Points — Preferred Points designed to permit a trailing movement through points closed against the intended move. The wheelset opens the points which spring back to the normal position after the wheelset is through.
Trailer Car (or Trailer Vehicle) — Preferred A non-powered passenger vehicle, with or without a drivers compartment and control facilitiesdrivers compartment and control facilities.
Trailing Movement — Preferred A wheelset movement through a set of points from the heel end to the toe end.
Trailing Points — Preferred Those switches over which rail traffic from two lines converge onto one line and the points of the switch blades are facing away from approaching rail traffic.
Train (Identification) Number — Preferred A train or run number used to provide unique identification of a train.
Train Acceptance — Preferred The overall process of gaining permission from a Rail Infrastructure Manager to operate trains comprising particular rolling stock over specific parts of the network.
Train Announcement — (Overseas) Operation by which a section box advises the forward box that a train has just entered or is going to enter the section between the two boxes.
Train Authority — Preferred An instruction in the prescribed format issued by the Network Control Officer in connection with the movement of a train.
Train Control Diagram (graph) — Preferred A diagram showing operational information for a train control area. Also known as a Train Control graph.
Train Control System (TCS) — (Overseas) One or more microprocessor based operator interface stations with the processing capacity to handle route setting, automatic route setting, train tracking, train describing, train reporting, event logging and all similar functionality.
Train Controller —  A Competent Worker who authorises, and may issue, Occupancy Authorities, and who manages rail traffic paths to ensure safe and efficient transit of rail traffic in the Network.
Train Deseriber — (Overseas) Signalling equipment provided to identify trains individually on a signaler's track indicator diagram, console unit, video display unit or video projection screen.
Train Deseriber Fringe Box — (Overseas) A signal box controlling a location that is an entry point for a train descriptor system. The fringe box contains train descriptor equipment and train identification details can be entered manually for the next train(s) to depart the particular controlled location.
Train Detection System — Preferred A system that detects the presence of a train or any other on track vehicle intended to be detected on a section of track. Systems include track circuits, axle counters, treadles and global positioning systems.
Train Graph — (Overseas) A plot of actual and projected train movements on a graph with axis of location versus time. Used by train controllers to predict crossing locations for opposing trains on single line sections and to manage the train movements accordingly. It serves also as a record of actual crossing locations and times.
Train Notice — Preferred Operational information issued by or on behalf of the Rail Infrastructure Manager.
Train Number — Preferred Unique character codes identifying rail traffic.
Train Operated Route Release — (Overseas) Related Term: Automatic Route Normalisation
Train Order — (Overseas) An instruction, on the prescribed form, issued by the train controller, in train order territory to direct the movement of rail traffic.
Train Order Crossing Station — (Overseas) A train order station within or at the start of or end of train order territory at which trains may cross pass or run round.
Train Order Non Crossing Station — (Overseas) A train order station in train order territory at which trains may not cross, pass or run round.
Train Order Section — (Overseas) That portion of main line between two adjoining train order crossing or non-crossing stations.
Train Order Station — (Overseas) A station where train orders may be received and which may or may not be in train order territory.
Train Order Territory — (Overseas) That portion of main or branch line specified as being the territory in which the train order system of safeworking is used.
Train Order Working — (Overseas) A system of Safeworking on single lines where train movements are governed by train orders issued by a train controller, who ensures that no conflicting train orders are on issue.
Train Path — Preferred The track over which a train may be authorised to travel, consisting of a distinct entry, exit and journey time. It consists of routes linked consecutively.
Train Protection And Control (TPC) System — Preferred A system used for authorising and safeguarding the safe operation of rail traffic and on-track work.
Train Protection System — Preferred A system which is able to enforce the authority of the signalling system onto the vehicle.
Train Radio — Preferred A radio system use to aid train operations and to provide communications between train crews, train controllers, and track maintenance staff.
Train Register Book — (Overseas) A book used in signal boxes, staff huts or at block posts to record information about the condition of the line or the movement of rail traffic.
Train Roster — (Overseas) Assigns the rollingstock to cover the timetable. Each entry in this working is referred to as a Run.
Train Running Information (TRI) — Preferred Information about rail traffic movement and frequency for a particular location.
Train Safety Recording — (Overseas) A recording consisting of (or mainly of) sounds or images or data, or any combination of sounds, images or data, produced by a device installed in a train, a signal box, a train control complex or other railway premises for the purpose of recording operational activities carried out by rail safety workers in relation to the operation of a train.
Train Shunt — Preferred Value of the electrical resistance of the shunt connection created between the two rails of a track circuit by the axles of a train.
Train Stop System — Preferred A system (also known as trip gear) involving a trip cock on the vehicle and a trip arm located track side which, when engaged, directly initiates an emergency brake application. The train stop is employed at signals in conjunction with a red aspect and also in areas where train speed is required to be externally controlled.
Tram —  A vehicle which runs on rails on a highway, road or easement specifically designated for use by a tram or light rail vehicle. Alternative name for a light rail vehicle.
Trammelling — Preferred Measurement of the bogie frame, e.g. centre line to centre line, check for squareness.
Transformer — Preferred Static apparatus for supplying an alternating current at one voltage when fed with alternating current at a different voltage.
Transit — Preferred Through-movement along a portion of line.
Transition — Preferred the physical movement from one jurisdiction to another through a designated boundary
Transition (track) — Preferred Track of variable radius, usually applied between tangent track and curved track or track comprising curves of different radii.
Transition Curve — (Overseas) A curve of uniformly varying radii used to connect straight and curved tracks or curves of different radii.
Transmission Based Signalling — Preferred A closed loop system which uses digital radio to provide vital data transmission between on-board train systems and signalling control systems.
Transom — Preferred Transverse members of track-supporting structures generally made from timber, to which the running and guard rails are fastened. These members are designed specifically as structural members of the track-supporting structure and should not be treated as sleepers.
Transponder — (Overseas) A unit usually mounted in the track and used to transmit information between track and train at short range radio frequencies. An antenna on the train passes over the transponder and one interrogates the other. The transponder may be passive and powered by carrier energy transmitted from the train, or be active, transmitting continuously or only when interrogated by a train. The transponder may hold fixed information and/or receive updated information through connection to the signalling system.
Trap Points — (Overseas) Catch-points or other facing points on a line which provide protection for another line by diverting train and vehicle movements on the line away from the protected line.
Travel — Preferred Purposeful movement from one location to another .
Travel Mode — Preferred When infrastructure maintenance rolling stock have their infrastructure maintenance equipment stowed and are able to travel between work sites.
Tread Line — Preferred The circumference of the wheel around the wheel tread measured 70 mm from the back face of the wheel (i.e. circumference at the nominal wheel/rail contact point), also known as the taping line.
Treadle — (Overseas) A device mounted next to a rail by which the deflection of the rail (due to the passage of an engine or vehicle) or the impact of the train wheels, or other means, operates a contact to open or close an electric circuit to detect the passage of train wheels.
Treadplate — Preferred The slip resistant platform adjacent to the door sill on rolling stock used by workers for boarding and alighting.
Trespass — Preferred The unauthorised access to the rail corridor by a person, livestock or vehicle. Trespass is either:- (a) Intentional: where an individual deliberately sets out to surmount or ignore a physical boundary measure or otherwise intentionally gain unauthorised entry to the rail corridor. or (b) Unintentional: where no physical barrier is provided or has otherwise been removed or an access gate has been left open or unlocked and an individual strays into the rail corridor.
TRI —  Train Running Information
Triangle — Preferred A track formation in the shape of a triangle which allows a locomotive do a three point turn so that it faces in the opposite direction. An alternative to a turntable.
Trip — (Overseas) A service in a working timetable.
Trip Cock — (Overseas) The trip valve and lever mechanism fitted on train stop systems.
Trip Valve — Preferred A pneumatic value mounted near the left-hand leading axle of multiple unit electric trains. If a train passes a trainstop when the trainstop arm is in the raised position, the trip valve arm will be moved backwards by the raised trainstop arm. The train's brakes will then be automatically applied.
Troughing — Preferred Steel or concrete casing located alongside the track to carry electrical cables for signalling and communications.
TSR —  Temporary Speed Restriction
Turnout — Preferred A combination of a set of points, V crossing and guard rails which permits traffic to turnout from one track to another.
Turnout, Ladder — (Overseas) An arrangement of turnouts leading from one turnout and providing two or more parallel tracks on the one side of the parent track.
Turnout, Nested — (Overseas) Refer to 'three throw (points)'.
Turnout, Repeater — (Overseas) A indicator displaying a white band of light on a black background, on the first warning signal in rear of a signal at a junction with a turnout speed significantly less than line speed. When that signal is cleared for the diverging route, the turnout repeater displays a white band of light inclined towards the direction the route ahead is set. Generally used to provide drivers of trains with advance information that a route through a low-speed turnout is ahead.
Turntable — (Overseas) A deck, usually over a circular pit, onto which a locomotive is driven and which pivots about its centre to turn a locomotive or allow it to run off onto other radiating tracks for storage.
Twenty Foot Equivalent Unit (TEU) —  Refer 'slots' or 'teus'
Twist — Preferred The variation in the cross-level between two track locations separated by a nominated distance interval.
Two Position / Two Aspect Signalling — (Overseas) Signalling using stop signals that only show two indications, 'stop' and ,clear', preceded by distant signals showing only 'caution' or Clear.
Type Test — Preferred A test conducted on a prototype to confirm that the product conforms to design specifications.
UIC —  Abbreviation for 'International Union of Railways'.
Unattended Interlocking — (Overseas) The term used to describe an interlocking which is not being controlled by a signaller. At some unattended interlockings the signals and points are worked by the train crew.
Unattended Location — Preferred A signalling location or block location that is not a remote controlled location, and where a Signaller is not on duty. Or A location not attended by a Competent Worker for safeworking purposes.
Unauthorised — Preferred Not given approval, or exceeding the limit of authority
Undercutting — Preferred The process of removing from the track, all ballast above the formation.
Unidirectional — Preferred Allowing for normal travel in one direction only according to the infrastructure and system of Safeworking in use.
Unidirectional Signalling — (Overseas) Signalling provided to allow the movement of trains in one direction only over a line.
Unit — (Overseas) A unit refers to a container, trailer, or a container mounted onto a trailer.
Unit Lever Operation — (Overseas) A method of signalling control with a separate lever for each set of points, each release switch and each signal. In setting up a signal route, the signaller is required to operate the levers for required points and/or releases individually before operating the lever for the particular signal. This contrasts with route control systems, entrance/exit or one control switch.
Unsprung Mass — Preferred The mass of a wheel, or wheelset, and other associated components which are not dynamically isolated from the track by vehicle suspension arrangements. This includes components due to the rotational inertia of any traction drive and motor casing unless effectively isolated by means of resilient couplings and frame suspended traction motors.
Up Line — (Overseas) In a double line area, the lines are generally referred to as the Up Line and Down Line. Usually, the up line is used by trains travelling towards the State Capital. However, local notices should be referenced to check this at any location.
Upgradeability — Preferred the measure of the ability to be upgraded or modified
Upgrading — Preferred means any major modification work on a subsystem or part of a subsystem which improves the overall performance of the subsystem.
Utility — Preferred A powerline, pipeline, conveyor, telecommunications line or similar item, or a duct carrying any of these, together with associated equipment and systems.
V Crossing — Preferred A crossing comprising a nose and two wings.
V End (crossing) — Preferred The end of a crossing which resembles a V. On a fabricated crossing it is the open end of the nose and scarf rails.
V Nose (points) — Preferred Points design where the toe of the switch is machined like an inverted letter 'V'. The design permits the switch toe to fit into machining of the head of the stock rail
V/Line Network — Preferred Victorian regional network.
Validation — Preferred Confirmation that the particular requirements for a specific intended use are fulfilled.
VDU —  Visual Display Unit
Vehicle — Preferred Used to denote rail vehicles where reference to a specific type or class is not required or not intended.
Verification — Preferred Testing and evaluation of an item of equipment or a system to assure compliance with its specification or other requirements.
Vertical Alignment — Preferred Related Term: Alignment
Victorian Broad Gauge Network — Preferred Victorian regional and Melbourne metropolitan broad gauge networks.
Victorian Network — Preferred Victorian regional and Melbourne metropolitan broad gauge networks.
Victorian Standard Gauge Network — Preferred Victorian regional non-interstate standard gauge network.
Vigilance System — Preferred A system that will react by directly initiating an emergency brake application if an acknowledgment input is not received within a specified time increment.
Visibility Lights — Preferred Lights, fitted below the headlights, to improve rolling stock's ability to be seen and to assist the crew in viewing of the immediate area in front of the vehicle. Also known as 'ditch lights' or 'crossing lights'.
Visual Display Unit — (Overseas) Terminal device with a screen on which text and graphics can be displayed. Used as an I/O (input/output) device in conjunction with a keyboard or a mouse for interactive computing.
Vital — Preferred Signalling equipment and circuits are considered vital where failure to function correctly could cause an unsafe outcome either directly or together with another signalling equipment or circuit failure. Vital signalling equipment is equipment whose safe operation is fundamental to the safe operation of the signalling system. Equipment for use in this mode should have been designed to ensure that it will not fail in an unsafe manner. This may well involve designing it in such a way that should it fail it will fail in a predetermined state which does not lead to an unsafe situation. Such equipment is termed Fail-safe.
Vital Blocking — Preferred Blocking which is incorporated in the interlocking apparatus and uses vital equipment to prevent the operation of particular signalling apparatus. Operator controls to apply blocking are independent of controls to remove the blocking.
Wagon — Preferred Used when describing or referring to rail vehicles of a specific type or group, e.g. freight wagons, service wagons, box wagons, tank wagons, flat wagons.
Wagon Booking — (Overseas) A wagon booking is an order to move wagons on a service leg transit leg.
Wagon Order — (Overseas) An instruction to perform a movement on a wagon, documented in the form of a shunt instruction or a train consist report.
Walking In The Danger Zone — Preferred Walking from place to place in the Danger Zone and doing no work other than placing or removing protection for a worksite or rail traffic.
Warm Standby — (Overseas) Form of redundancy in which the secondary equipment is continuously operating, but is not enabled to generate outputs except in the event of a failure of the primary equipment. Results in a short period of loss of function until the system completes transfer to the secondary unit.
Warning Board — (Overseas) A temporary speed board with the word WARNING and a speed plate attached to warn drivers of the speed at which trains are to travel over the next portion of the line which may be unsafe at normal speed.
Warning Light — (Overseas) A light provided for warning employees of approaching trains. The warning light is illuminated when there is no train approaching.
WARNING/CAUTION Handsignal — Preferred A handsignal to indicate to rail traffic crews to reduce to, and travel at restricted speed.
Wayleave — Preferred Any crossing, either overhead or underground by an electric cable, conductor or other service main being the property of a supply authority, private company or individual, is commonly referred to as a wayleave.
Wayside — Preferred Parts of the Infrastructure not directly involved in train operations but necessary for the safe and effective operation of the railway.
Web — Preferred That part of the rail between the head and the foot.
Weekly Notice — (Overseas) A publication to advertise changes to, and details of, safeworking arrangements.
Weekly Speed Notice — (Overseas) An information sheet listing temporary speed restrictions for specific locations.
Well Wagon (or Well Car) — Preferred A flat wagon having the height above rail of the underframe/deck structure reduced between the bogies to provide additional vertical load space.
Wheel Burn — Preferred A scar on the running surface of the rail caused by intense friction heating from driving wheel slippage. The flowed metal may chip out and thermal cracks may develop into a transverse defect.
Wheel Clearance — Preferred For a wheelset positioned on the centreline of the track, the wheel clearance is the lateral distance between one fully worn wheel flange and the adjacent new rail.
Wheel Detector — Preferred A magnetic treadle which senses the presence or passage of a train wheel.
Wheel Flange — Preferred The larger, inner part of rolling stock's wheel. It is used as a means of the guidance of the train and keeping it on the track.
Wheel Scale — Preferred A build up of metallic material on a wheel tread's surface.
Wheel Transfer Area — Preferred The area on a crossing or points at which the wheel tread transfers gradually from one rail to another.
Wheel Web — Preferred The section between the wheel hub and the wheel rim.
Wheelset — Preferred An assembly consisting of axle, wheels, bearings, and where applicable associated components such as brake discs, traction gears, traction motor support bearings, gearbox, etc.
Wheelset Electrical Resistance — Preferred It is the resistance between the rail contact surfaces between wheels on the same axle. The electrical resistance is measured from the rail contact surface of one wheel to the rail contact surface of the other wheel via the axle of that wheelset.
Whistle — Preferred A device such as a bell, whistle, siren, horn or hooter, fitted to rail traffic to give audible warning.
Wing End (crossing) — Preferred That end of the crossing formed by the wing rails. It is the opposite to the V end.
Wing Rail — Preferred The rails of a crossing (on the end closest to the switch in a turnout) that are flared to allow the passage of the wheel to transfer to or from the crossing nose. Named for their resemblance to a wing in shape.
Wire Count — (Overseas) This is a count of the number of conductors terminated on each wire termination point and at every wire termination point. The count is certified against the circuit wiring diagrams and cross checked against the analysis sheets.
Work Authority — Preferred A formal authority that allows rail traffic to move in either direction between specified locations.
Work group — Preferred One or more workers who function as a team to undertake a common task in the rail corridor under the supervision of a Workgroup Supervisor and have their own prestart briefing.
Work Hardening Process — Preferred A mechanical means of increasing the hardness of susceptible steels. The most common processes employ explosives or peening particularly of manganese casting.
Work Instruction — Preferred Documents which describe how a process is performed.
Work Lighting — Preferred Lights fitted to allow effective and safe operation when in working mode (as opposed to when travelling). Typically fitted to infrastructure maintenance rolling stock.
Work Mode — Preferred When infrastructure maintenance rolling stock have their infrastructure maintenance equipment deployed or operational and are able to travel at their working speed.
Work On Track — Preferred The work performed in the Rail Corridor. To perform work in the Rail Corridor.
Work On Track Authority — Preferred An authority to perform work on track. See Local Possession Authority (LPA), 'Track Occupancy Authority' (TOA) or 'Track Work Authority' (TWA).
Work Out Of Service — Preferred To work to a suitable yard, service depot, siding or location where rolling stock can leave the running line for repair or replacement of vehicle equipment.
Work Site Safety Supervisor — (не предп.) The worker responsible for safety and protection of personnel at a track worksite and ensuring that the site is safe for the operation of trains.
Work Train — Preferred An accident, ballast or breakdown train including a train delivering or collecting materials or engaged in connection with accidents, derailments, washaways or the like. A train used in maintenance or construction activities.
Worker — (не предп.) Related Term: Rail Safety Worker
Working Roster — (Overseas) The working roster contains all the work allocated to a depot in the master roster. It allocates drivers to work lines and adjusts the work to accommodate additional trains, canceled trains, training, planned leave and/or any other issues which are known at the time of posting the working roster. The working roster is issued weekly. This roster is used to determine overtime payments.
Working Timetable — (Overseas) Contains all train movements. Each service in the working timetable is generally referred to as a train or trip.
Worksite — Preferred A worksite is an area with defined limits that is protected so that work can be performed.
Worksite Protection — Preferred The process for ensuring the safety of personnel at a track worksite and ensuring that the site is safe for trains.
Worksite Supervisor — (Overseas) The worker responsible for the safety of personnel at a track worksite and ensuring that the site is safe for the operation of trains.
WOTA —  Abbreviation for ‘Work on Track Authority’.
Wrong Road Signal — (Overseas) Signals used for movements in the wrong running direction on a running line.
Wrong Running-direction — (Overseas) The direction opposite to the normal direction of travel on unidirectional lines.
Wrong Side Failure — (Overseas) A failure in a system which causes a potentially dangerous situation to exist.
XL Lock — (Overseas) A special safeworking padlock with a limited number of keys held by authorised operations staff.
Yard Limits — (Overseas) 1. A system of track within defined limits. (NSW) 2. A system of tracks not designated as part of the defined interstate rail network used for loading or unloading trains or for other purposes. (ARTC) A portion of the running lines identified by yard limit signs marking the entrance to the yard or movement within the yard. Related Term: Section
Yards And Terminals — (Overseas) A system of tracks not designated as part of the defined interstate rail network used for loading or unloading trains or for other purposes.