---
title: "Glossary of railroad terms"
sourceName: "Book. The Western Pacific Railroad. Glossary of railroad terms"
sourceUrl: "https://wplives.org/wphistory_wp_documents/GLOSSARY_OF_RAILROAD_TERMS.pdf"
regions:
  - "US"
lastUpdated: "2025-07-06"
collectedBy: "A. Piatrou"
---

"A" END OF CAR — The end opposite that on which the hand brake is mounted.
"A" UNIT — A Diesel unit equipped with a cab and operating controls.
AB BRAKE — The current standard freight car air brake system. Also see AUTOMATIC AIR BRAKE.
AB CONTROL VALVE — The operating valve of the AB freight car air brake. It controls the charging, application and release of the brakes.
ABSOLUTE BLOCK — A block which a train or engine is not permitted to enter while it is occupied except as prescribed by the rules.
ADVANCE OF A SIGNAL — The side of the signal opposite to that from which the indication is received.
AGENT — See FREIGHT AGENT.
AIR BAG — An inflatable bag or bladder usually pillow shaped used as dummage or between faces of a bulkhead in a boxcar.
AIR BRAKE HOSE — The flexible connection between the brake pipes of cars or locomotives.
AIR COMPRESSOR — A power-driven air pump which supplies compressed air for the operation of air brakes and other air-actuated equipment.
AIR GAGE (Air Brake) — An instrument which indicates the amount of air pressure in the reservoirs or brake pipe.
AIR PAK CAR — Trade Mark used by Evans Products for air bag bulkhead cars.
AIR PIPE (Air Brake) — See BRAKE PIPE.
ALERTOR — A device which detects the frequency of the engineman's movements and initiates an air brake application when the required frequency of such movement is not maintained. See DEADMAN CONTROL.
ALLEY (slang) — A clear track for movement through a yard.
ANGLE COCK — A two-position valve located at both ends of the brake pipe on locomotives, passenger and freight cars. When open, it allows the passage of air.
APPROACH SIGNAL — A fixed signal used in connection with one or more signals to govern the approach thereto.
ARRIVAL NOTICE — A notice, furnished to consignee, of the arrival of freight.
ASPECT — The appearance of a fixed signal conveying an indication.
ASSIGNED CAR — Car which has been assigned to a particular industry or for use with a specific commodity.
AUTOMATIC AIR BRAKE — A braking system which draws air from the atmosphere and stores it under pressure. A reduction in brake pipe pressure, regardless of how it is made, (bleeding of air by use of a valve, or by a break in the train line) automatically applies the brakes. An increase of brake pipe pressure causes brakes to release.
AUTOMATIC BLOCK SIGNALING — (1) A system in which signals are operated automatically by a train, a broken rail, an open switch, a car standing on a turnout fouling the main track, etc. (2) Railroad crossing flashers and gates operated automatically by the approach of a train.
AUTOMATIC BLOCK SIGNAL SYSTEM (ABSS) — A block signal system wherein the use of each block is governed by an automatic block signal, cab signal or both.
AUTOMOBILE CAR — A car specially designed for transporting automobiles. It may be a type of box car or type of flat car usually called an automobile rack car.
AUTOMOBILE PARTS CAR — A box car specially fitted for transportation of automobile parts in racks without packing.
AUTOMOBILE RACK CAR — Flat car with steel racks for transporting fully assembled automobiles. Racks have either two or three levels, are equipped with tie-down devices, and are cushioned for vertical and horizontal shocks.
AUXILIARY RESERVOIR — A reservoir for storage of compressed air to operate the brakes of each individual car, and supplied from the main reservoir on the locomotive through the brake pipe.
AVERAGE AGREEMENT — An agreement made between an industry and the railroad whereby the industry is debited for the time cars are held for loading or unloading beyond a certain period, and credited for the time cars are released within that certain period. Demurrage charges are assessed at the end of the month for any outstanding debits.
"B" END OF CAR — The end on which the hand brake is located.
"B" UNIT — A Diesel unit without a cab and without complete operating controls. Usually equipped with hostler controls for independent operating at terminals.
BACK HAUL — To haul a shipment back over part of the route which it has travelled.
BACK-UP AIR SIGNAL — A warning whistle which can be operated at the rear of the train when backing up. Air for its operation is taken from the train line.
BAD ORDER — Car in need of repair.
BALLAST — Selected material placed on the road-bed to hold track in line. Ballast preferably consists of hard particles easily handled in tamping, which distribute the load, drain well, and resist plant growth.
BALLAST CAR — A car for carrying ballast for repair and construction work, usually a gondola or hopper.
BALLAST TAMPER — A machine for compacting ballast under the ties.
BELT LINE — A short railroad operating within or around a city.
BIG HOLE (slang) — Emergency position of the air brake valve.
BILLED WEIGHT — The weight shown on a waybill and freight bill.
BILLET CAR — A low side gondola car built of steel throughout for transportation of hot steel billets.
BILLING POINT — Location where the waybill is prepared.
BILLING REPAIR CARD — The card furnished to the car owner when repair work is done on a foreign car.
BILL OF LADING — A contract for transportation services authorized by a tariff.
BLEED VALVE — See RELEASE VALVE.
BLOCK — (1) A length of track of defined limits, the use of which by trains and engines is governed by block signals, block limit signals, cab signals or cab signals and block signals. (2) A group of cars classified for movement to the same yard or terminal.
BLOCKING OR BRACING — Wood or metal supports to keep shipments in place in or on cars.
BLOCK SIGNAL — A signal at the entrance of a block to govern trains and engines entering and using that block.
BLOCK SIGNAL SYSTEM — A method of governing the movement of trains into or within one or more blocks by the use of signals.
BOARD — (1) A fixed signal regulating railroad traffic and usually referred to as a Slow Board, Order Board, Clear Board or Red Board. (2) A list of employees available for service. Also called extra board.
BOARDING CAR — A term commonly applied to a car used as a place of lodging for workmen. In the case of wreck trains, they are more often called dining and sleeping cars.
BODY CENTER PLATE — The center plate attached to the underside of the body bolster. See CENTER PLATE.
BOOGIE — (1) The running gear of a highway semi-trailer which may be removed. (2) The term used generally to mean swivel railway truck.
BOLSTER — A cross member on the underside of a car body and in the center of a truck, through which the weight is transmitted. The bolsters carry the body and truck center plates, the body bolster resting on the truck bolster, and is connected to it with a center pin.
BOX CAR — An enclosed car used for general service and especially for lading which must be protected from the weather.
BRAKE CLUB — Three foot hickory stick used by freight trainmen to tighten hand brakes.
BRAKE CYLINDER (Air Brake) — A cylinder containing a piston which is forced outwardly by compressed air to apply the brakes. When the air pressure is released it is returned to its normal position by a release spring coiled about the piston rod inside the cylinder.
BRAKEMAN — Train service employe who assists with train and yard operations.
BRAKE PAML (Hand Brake) — A small, specially shaped, steel piece, pivoted to engage the teeth of a brake ratchet wheel to prevent turning backward, and thus releasing the brakes.
BRAKE PIPE — The air brake piping of a car or locomotive which acts as a supply pipe for the reservoirs. When all brake pipes on the cars are joined, the entire pipe line comprises what is commonly called the "train line."
BRAKE RATCHET (Hand Brake) — A wheel attached to the brake shaft, having teeth which the pavl engages, thus preventing the wheel and shaft from turning backward.
BRAKE SHAFT — A shaft on which a chain is wound and by which the power of a hand brake is applied to the wheels.
BRAKE SHOE — Friction material shaped to fit the tread of the wheel when the brakes are applied.
BRAKE STEP — A small shelf or ledge on the end of a freight car on which the brakeman stands when applying the hand brake. Sometimes called a brake footboard.
BRAKE VALVE (Air Brake) — The valve by which the engineer operates the brakes. The proper name is engineer's brake valve.
BRAKE WHEEL — An iron wheel attached to the upper end of the brake shaft which is manually turned to apply the brakes.
BROAD GAGE (Track) — When the distance between the heads of the rails is greater than 4 ft. 9 in. See NARROW GAGE, STANDARD GAGE and GAGE OF TRACK.
BULK FREIGHT — Freight not in packages or containers.
BULKHEAD — A partition which divides the car into sections or compartments. See COMPARTMENTIZER.CAR.
BULKHEAD FLAT — A flat car with adjustable bulkheads at each end of the car, used for plywood, wallboard, etc.
BUMP — Displace a junior man (with less seniority) on an existing position.
BUMPING POST — A braced post or block placed at the end of a stub track to prevent rolling cars from going off the ends of the rails. See CAR STOP.
BUNCHING — The accumulation and tender of cars for loading or unloading in excess of orders or contrary to customary schedules.
BUSINESS CAR — See OFFICE CAR.
CAB — The space in a locomotive "A" unit containing the operating controls and providing shelter and seats for the engine crew.
CABOOSE — A car which is attached to the rear of freight trains for the accommodation of the conductor and trainmen as office and quarters while in transit. Sometimes called Cabin Car, Way Car, Hack, Shanty, Crummy.
CABOOSE VALVE — A valve located in the caboose so emergency brake applications may be made from the rear end of the train.
CAB SIGNAL — A device located in the cab of the locomotive which indicates the condition of the track ahead, whether clear or occupied, by a display of signals. When equipped with automatic train stop: When a cab signal indication requires a speed restriction and the train is permitted to proceed at a higher speed, an audible warning will sound. If the engineer does not respond within a time limit by reducing power and making a service brake application, the train will automatically stop.
CALLER — An employee who notifies train and engine crews and other employees to report for duty.
CAPACITY (Freight Car) — The normal load in pounds, cubic feet or gallons which the car is designed to carry. These figures are stencilled on the car.
CARD BOARD — A small board, secured to the outside of a freight car, on which are tacked cards giving shipping directions or warning of dangerous lading, etc.
CAR DISTRIBUTOR — An individual who is assigned the responsibility of distributing empty freight cars.
CARD RACK — A small receptacle on the outside of a freight car to receive cards giving shipping directions.
CAR DUMPER — A device for quick unloading of bulk materials such as coal or grain. After being clamped to the rail, the car is tilted or rolled over to discharge the lading.
CAR FLOAT — A large flat-bottomed boat equipped with tracks on which railroad cars are moved in inland waterways.
CAR KNOCKER (slang) — Car Inspector.
CAR LINING — Material placed on the walls of a car for the protection of goods.
CARLOAD — The quantity of freight required for the application of a carload rate.
CARLOAD RATE — A rate applicable to a carload quantity of freight.
CAR MILE — The movement of a car the distance of one mile. -A term used in statistical data.
CAR SEAL — See SEALS.
CAR STOP — A device for stopping motion of a car by engaging the wheels, as distinguished from a bumping post which arrests motion upon contact with the coupler of a car. See BUMPING POST.
CENTER DUMP CAR — A car which will discharge its entire load between the rails.
CENTER PIN OR KING BOLT — A large bolt which passes through the center plates on the body bolster and truck bolster. The truck turns about the bolt, but the stress is taken by the center plates. It is, therefore, a mere pin and not a bolt in the usual sense.
CENTER PLATE — One of a pair of plates which fit one into the other and which support the car body on the trucks, allowing them to turn freely under the car. The center pin or king bolt passes through both, but does not really serve as a pivot. The male or body center plate is attached to the underside of the body bolster. The female or truck center plate is attached to the topside of the truck bolster.
CENTER SILL — The central longitudinal member of the underframe of a car which forms, as it were, the backbone of the underframe and transmits most of the buffing shocks, from one end of the car to the other. Freight cars with cushioned underframes use a special type of floating center sill construction. See CUSHION UNDERFRAME.
CIRCUITOUS ROUTE — An extremely indirect route.
CIRCUS LOADING — A means of loading highway trailers by moving them over the ends of the cars.
CLASSIFICATION (Freight Cars) — A destination and routing code used on switch lists for ease in switching cars.
CLASSIFICATION YARD — A yard where cars are grouped according to their destinations and made ready for proper train movement.
CLASS RATE — A rate based on an assigned class rating (a percentage of first class) published in the Uniform Freight Classification.
CLEANING IN TRANSIT — The stopping of articles, such as peanuts, etc., at a point located between the points of origin and destination to be cleaned.
CLEARANCE OR CLEARANCE LIMIT — The limiting dimensions of height and width for cars in order that they may safely clear all bridges, tunnels, station platforms and other structures as well as equipment on adjacent tracks.
CLEAR BOARD — A signal indication displayed to advise that no train orders are being held. (Also See BOARD)
CLEAT — A strip of wood or metal used to afford additional strength, to prevent warping, or to hold in position.
COAL CAR — A car for carrying coal, usually a hopper car.
COKE RACK — A slatted frame or box applied above the sides and ends of gondola or hopper cars to increase the cubic capacity for the purpose of carrying coke or other freight in which the bulk is large relative to the weight.
COMBINATION RATE — A rate made by combining two or more rates published in different tariffs.
COMMODITY RATE — A rate applicable to a specific commodity between certain specified points.
COMPARTMENTIZER CAR — A box car equipped with moveable bulkheads which can be used to divide the car into separate compartments.
COMPARTMENT TANK CAR — A tank car with the tank body divided into several sections for the purpose of carrying different commodities in each compartment or smaller shipments.
CONCEALED DAMAGE — Damage to the contents of a package which is in good order externally.
CONDUCTOR — Train service employee in charge of train or yard crew. Also called Yard Foreman.
CONFLICTING ROUTES — Two or more routes over which movements cannot be made simultaneously without possibility of collision.
CONNECTING CARRIER — A railroad which has a direct physical connection with another or forming a connecting link between two or more railroads.
CONSIGNEE — Persons or firm to whom shipment is destined.
CONSIGNEE MARKS — A symbol placed on packages for export generally consisting of a square, triangle, diamond, circle, cross, etc. with designed letters and/or numbers for the purpose of identification.
CONSIGNOR — Person or firm from whom shipment originates. Also called shipper.
CONSTRUCTIVE PLACEMENT — When, due to some disability on the part of the consignor or consignee, a car cannot be placed for loading or unloading, it is considered as being under Constructive Placement and subject to demurrage rules and charges, the same as if it were actually placed.
CONTAINER CAR — A flat or open top car, such as a gondola, on which containers of freight are loaded.
CONTINUOUS SEALS — A term denoting that the seals on a car remained intact during the movement of the car from point of origin to destination; or, if broken in transit, that it was done by proper authority and without opportunity for loss to occur before new seals were applied. Also see SEALS.
CONTROLLED POINT — A location where the signals and/or switches of a traffic control system are operated and/or controlled from a distant location by a train dispatcher.
CONTROLLED SIDING — A siding, the use of which is governed by signals under the control of a train dispatcher or operator.
CORNERED — A term used when a car has been struck by another car because it was not in the clear. See IN THE CLEAR.
COUPLER — An appliance for connecting cars or locomotives together. Government regulations require that these must couple automatically by impact and must be uncoupled without going between the cars.
COUPLER CENTERING DEVICE — An arrangement for maintaining the coupler normally in the center line of draft but allowing it to move to either side when a car is rounding a curve while coupled to another car.
COUPLER KNUCKLE LOCK — The block which drops into position when the knuckle closes and holds it in place, preventing uncoupling.
COUPLER LOCK LIFTER — The part of the mechanism inside the coupler head which is moved by the uncoupling rod and, in moving, lifts the knuckle lock so that the knuckle can open.
COVERED GONDOLAS — Gondolas which have been equipped with some form of removable cover which can be placed over the lading to protect it from weather exposure in transit. Used primarily for loading sheet steel in coils or bundles without the necessity of packing.
COVERED HOPPER CAR — A hopper car with a permanent roof, roof hatches and bottom openings for unloading. Used for carrying cement or other bulk commodities.
"CP" (Slang) — See CONSTRUCTIVE PLACEMENT or CONTROLLED POINT.
CREW — General term used to describe the individuals working together as a unit, such as train crew.
CRIB — That portion of ballast between two adjacent ties.
CRIPPLE (Slang) — See BAD ORDER.
CROSSING (Track) — A structure used where one track crosses another at grade, and consisting of four connected frogs.
CROSSOVER — Two turnouts with track between, connecting two nearby and usually parallel tracks.
CROSS TIE — The transverse member of the track structure to which the rails are spiked to provide proper gage and to cushion, distribute, and transmit the stresses of traffic through the ballast to the roadbed.
CRUMMY (Slang) — See CABOOSE.
CUBICAL CAPACITY — The carrying capacity of a car according to measurement in cubic feet.
CUPOLA — A small cabin built on the roof of a caboose to afford a means of lookout for the train crew.
CURRENT OF TRAFFIC — The movement of trains on a track in a designated direction specified in the timetable.
CUSHION UNDERFRAME — A term commonly used to designate the framework of a railway car which is designed to prevent the shocks and impact stresses from damaging the car structure or its lading. The principle involved is the application of a center sill member which is detached and permitted to travel longitudinally in either direction through the bolsters, crossbearers and end sills. This travel is resiliently or hydraulically resisted and controlled by high capacity cushion gears located within the center sills.
CUT — (1) (verb) - To uncouple a car. (2) (noun) - A group of cars coupled together. (3) (noun) - That part of the right-of-way which is excavated out of a hill or mountain instead of running up over it or being tunneled through it.
CUTOUT COCK (Air Brake) — A valve which, when closed, will by-pass or cut out the brake system for that car. The closing of this valve does not interfere with the operation of the brakes on the other cars in the train.
CUT THE BOARD — To reduce the number of men on the extra board. See EXTRA BOARD.
DAMAGE FREE CAR — Car equipped with special bracing devices to decrease the possibility of damage to lading. Usually called "DF" car.
DEADHEAD — (1) Fireman's term for brakeman. (2) Employee riding on company pass or on company business. (3) Train and/or engine crew moved without performing service, from one terminal to another at railroad convenience and for which they are paid.
DEADMAN — A buried timber, log or beam designed as an anchorage to which a guy wire or cable is fastened to support a structure, as a wood or steel column, derrick or mast.
DEADMAN CONTROL — A foot pedal or brake valve which must be kept in a depressed position while the locomotive is operating. A release from this depressed position initiates an air brake application after a short time delay.
DEAD RAIL — A second set of tracks over a scale used when cars are not being weighed.
DECK — Floor of locomotive cab or cars.
DEFECT CARD RECEPTACLE — A small metal container, placed underneath the car for protection from the weather, in which defect cards are placed.
DELIVERING CARRIER — The railroad which delivers a shipment to the consignee.
DEMURRAGE — A penalty charge assessed by railroads for the detention of cars by shippers or receivers of freight, beyond a specified free time.
DEPRESSED CENTER FLAT CAR — A flat car with the section of the floor between the trucks depressed to permit loading of high shipments within overhead clearance limits. Also called a well flat.
DERAIL — A track safety device designed to guide a car off the rails at a selected spot as a means of protection against collisions or other accidents; commonly used on spurs or sidings to prevent cars from fouling the main line.
DESTINATION — The place to which a shipment is consigned.
"DF" CAR — See DAMAGE FREE CAR.
DIAMOND — See CROSSING.
DIESEL ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE — A locomotive in which one or more diesel engines drive electric generators which in turn supply electric motors (usually series D.C.) which are geared to the driving axles.
DINKY (slang) — A small engine used around roundhouses or backshops for switching.
DIVISION — (1) Portion of the railroad assigned to the supervision of the superintendent usually consisting of yards, stations and sidings. (2) The apportionment, by carriers, of revenue received from joint traffic.
DOUBLE — (1) Two consecutive tours of duty. (2) Putting train together when part of train is on one track and balance on another.
DOUBLE DECK (Stock Car) — A car with a second floor (often made removable) half way between the ordinary floor and the roof, to increase the carrying capacity of the car for small live stock, such as pigs and sheep.
DRAFT GEAR — The unit which forms the connection between the coupler rigging and the center sill. The purpose of this unit is to receive the shocks incidental to train movements and coupling of cars, and so cushion the force of impact.
DRAG (Slang) — (1) A heavy train, usually coal, ore, stone. (2) Group of cars for movement from one point to another within a terminal. (3) Train of empties.
DRAWBAR — A term used synonymously with Coupler. See COUPLER.
DRAWHEAD — The head of an automatic coupler, exclusive.of the knuckle, knuckle pin and lock.
DRILLING (Car) — The handling or,switching of cars in freight yards.
DRILL TRACK — A track connecting with the ladder track, over which engines and cars move back and forth in switching.
DROP — Switching movement in which cars are cut off from an engine and allowed to roll free into a track.
DROP BOTTOM CAR — A gondola car with a level floor, equipped with a number of drop doors for discharging the load.
DROP BRAKE SHAFT — A brake shaft for flat cars which normally extends above the floor, but can be dropped down should conditions of the lading require.
DROP END GONDOLA CAR — A gondola car with end doors which can be dropped when the car is used for shipping long material which extends over more than one car.
DUMP CAR — A car from which the load is discharged either through doors or by tipping the car body.
DUNNAGE — The material used to protect or support freight in or on cars, such as bracings, false floors, meat racks, etc.
DYNAMIC BRAKING — A means of braking a locomotive or car having electric motors by using the motors as generators and dissipating this power through resistors. It may be used to control train speed and to brake a train to a low speed after which air brakes bring it to a full stop.
EASY SIGN — A hand signal indicating the train is to move slowly.
ELECTRICALLY LOCKED SWITCH — A hand-operated switch equipped with an electrically controlled device which restricts the movement of the switch.
EMBARGO — An order prohibiting the acceptance and/or handling of freight at certain points or via certain routes due to emergencies, congestion, strikes, etc.
EMERGENCY APPLICATION — A quick heavy reduction of brake pipe pressure made when a train must be stopped in the minimum distance possible. An emergency application may also occur when a brake pipe is broken, or when air hoses between cars are disconnected with angle cocks open.
EMERGENCY BRAKE VALVE — A valve for applying the train brakes in emergency. It is connected to the brake pipe by a branch pipe and operated by releasing brake pipe air to the atmosphere.
EMERGENCY RATE (Freight) — A rate established to meet some immediate and pressing need, and without due regard to the usual rate factors.
EMERGENCY RESERVOIR — A part of the AB air brake system to provide quick recharge, graduated release and high emergency cylinder pressure. It supplements the supply from the auxiliary reservoir.
EMPTY CAR BILL — Waybill used to move ordinary empty cars from one station to another.
END DOOR — A door in the end of a car. In some box cars this door is used for loading and unloading long material which cannot be handled through the side door. Sometimes called lumber door.
ENGINE — A unit propelled by any form of energy or a combination of such units operated from a single control, used in train or yard service.
ENGINEMAN — The driver or operator of a locomotive. Also called Engineer.
ENGINEER'S BRAKE VALVE (Air Brake) — A brake valve in the locomotive for operating the brakes of the train.
EN ROUTE — On the way.
EXCEPTIONS TO CLASSIFICATION — A publication containing classification ratings (a percentage of first class) and rules different (generally lower) from the classification ratings and rules shown in the Uniform Freight Classification. See UNIFORM FREIGHT CLASSIFICATION.
EXCHANGE BILL OF LADING — A Bill of Lading issued in exchange for another bill of lading.
EXPENSE BILL — See FREIGHT BILL.
EXPIRATION NOTICE — A notice in a tariff that all or some part of it will expire at a stated time.
EXPORT — To send goods to a foreign country.
EXPORT RATE — A rate published on traffic moving from an interior point to a port for trans-shipment to a foreign country.
EXTRA BOARD — See BOARD.
EXTRA TRAIN — A train not included in a time-table schedule.
FABRICATION IN TRANSIT — The stopping of steel products at a point located between the points of origin and destination for further process of manufacture. For example, steel beams to be fabricated as bridge girders.
FACING MOVEMENT — The movement of a train over the points of a switch which face in a direction opposite to that in which the train is moving.
FEEDING IN TRANSIT — The stopping of shipments of live stock, etc., at a point located between the points of origin and destination to be fed and watered.
FIFTH WHEEL — The supporting plate and pivot at the forward end of a truck trailer.
FIXED SIGNAL — A signal of fixed location indicating a condition affecting the movement of a train or engine.
FLAG STATION — A station at which trains only stop when signalled.
FLAMMABLE — Commodity which can easily be ignited.
FLANGE (Car Wheel) — A projecting edge or rim on the circumference of the wheel to keep it on the rail.
FLAT CAR — An open car without sides, ends or top, used principally for hauling lumber, stone, heavy machinery, etc.
FLAT WHEEL — A car wheel that has flat spots on the tread.
FLOATAGE — (1) The floating or transfer of railroad cars across water. (2) Also the charge for such service.
FLOAT BRIDGE — A bridge connecting car floats with rail landings.
FLOATING LOAD — A load in which the lading is prepared as a unit with space between unit and ends of car and end blocking omitted. The lengthwise movement of the lading over the floor of the car permits the dissipating of impact shocks.
FREE TIME — The time allowed by the carriers for the loading or unloading of freight after which demurrage or detention charges will accrue.
FREIGHT AGENT — Railroad's representative with the public who prices services performed based on approved tariffs.
FREIGHT BILL — Statement given customer of charges for transportation. Information is taken from waybill.
FREIGHT CLASSIFICATION — See CLASSIFICATION and also UNIFORM FREIGHT CLASSIFICATION.
FREIGHT CHARGE — The charge assessed for transporting freight.
FREIGHT CLAIM — A demand upon a carrier for the payment of overcharge, loss or damage sustained by shipper or consignee.
FREIGHT FORWARDER — A person engaged in the business of shipping and distributing less than carload freight.
FREIGHT HOUSE — The station facility of a transportation line for receiving and delivering freight.
FROG — (1) A track structure used at the intersection of two running rails to provide support for wheels and passageways for their flanges, thus permitting wheels on either rail to cross to the other. (2) An implement for rerailing car wheels.
FULL SERVICE APPLICATION — An application of the brakes resulting from a reduction in brake pipe pressure at a service rate until maximum brake cylinder pressure is developed.
FUSEE — Red flare used for flagging purposes.
GAGE OF TRACK — The distance between the heads of the rails, measured at a point 5/8 inch below the top of rails. Standard gage is 4 feet, 8 1/2 inches. See BROAD GAGE AND NARROW GAGE.
GANDY DANCER (Slang) — Track laborer.
GANTRY CRANE — A stilted traveling crane supported on a bridge or trestle. Trestle bents are constructed on wheels so the whole structure travels on a track laid on the ground or floor.
GATEWAY — A point at which freight moving from one territory to another is interchanged between railroads.
GONDOLA CAR — An open top car with sides and ends and without a roof, used for transporting bulk materials such as coal, ore, scrap, etc. Gondolas are built with varying side heights: low side, high side, drop end, drop bottom and general service.
GRAB IRON — Steel bar attached to cars and engines as a hand hold.
GRADIENT (Brake Pipe) — The difference in brake pipe pressure between the front and the rear of the train. It is the direct result of leakage or train line obstruction.
GRAIN DOOR — A partition placed across the door of a box car to prevent loss of grain by leaking.
GROSS TON — 2,240 pounds.
GROSS TON-MILE — The movement of a ton of transportation equipment and contents a distance of one mile.
GROSS WEIGHT — (1) The weight of an article together with the weight of its container and the material used for packing. (2) As applied to a carload, the weight of a car together with the weight of its entire contents.
HACK (Slang) — See CABOOSE.
HAND BRAKE — The brake apparatus used to manually apply the brakes on a car or locomotive.
HEAD END — Beginning or forward portion of any train.
HEADER — Beginning or identifying portion of any list or consist.
HEAD MAN — Brakeman responsible for work done in connection with the forward section of the train and, when in transit, is stationed in the locomotive.
HEAD PIN (Slang) — Head man.
HEATER (Switch) — A device for melting snow at switches by means of steam, an electric current, gas jets or oil.
HEATER CAR — An insulated box car equipped with heating apparatus for the protection of perishables.
HIGHBALL (Slang) — Signal given to proceed at maximum authorized speed.
HIGH IRON (Slang) — Main line or high speed track of a system of main line tracks.
HIGH RAIL — The outer or elevated rail of a curved track.
HIGH SIDE GONDOLA CAR — A gondola car with sides and ends over 36 in. high.
HOG (Slang) — Road Locomotive.
HOGGER (Slang) — Locomotive engineer.
HOG HEAD (Slang) — Locomotive engineer.
HOURS OF SERVICE LAW — The Federal statute which provides that all train and engine crews must be relieved of duty after 12 hours of continuous service.
HOLD TRACK — A track on which cars are held awaiting disposition.
HOLE (Slang) — Passing track enabling one train to pass another.
HOME — A location where a car is on the tracks of its owner.
HOME CAR — A car on the tracks of its owner.
HOME JUNCTION — A junction with the home road.
HOME ROAD — The owning road of a railroad car.
HOME ROUTE — The return route of a foreign empty car to the owning road.
HOME SIGNAL — A fixed signal at the entrance to an interlocking to govern trains or engines entering and using that block.
HOOK (Slang) — A crane used in wreck train service. Also called "Big Hook" or "Wrecker."
HOPPER — An open top car with one or more pockets or hoppers opening on the underside of the car to permit quick unloading of bulk commodities.
HORSEPOWER — A term used as a measure of power. One horsepower is equivalent to a force that will raise 33,000 pounds one foot in one minute.
HOSTLER — A fireman who operates light engines in designated enginehouse territory and works under the direction of the enginehouse foreman.
HOSTLER'S CONTROL — A simplified throttle provided to move the "B" unit of a Diesel Locomotive not equipped with a regular engineer's control.
HOT BOX — An overheated journal caused by, excessive friction between bearing and journal, lack of lubricant or foreign matter.
HOT BOX DETECTOR — A wayside infra red sensing instrument for determining journal temperatures.
HUMP — An incline in a railroad yard, over which cars are uncoupled and allowed to roll free into a classification yard.
HY-CUBE CAR — A box car of approximately 85-ft. length and 10,000 cu ft. capacity designed for hauling automobile body stampings and other low density freight.
ICE BUNKER (Refrigerator Car) — The compartment in which the ice is placed.
ICING CHARGE — A charge made for icing perishable freight.
IDLER CAR — An unloaded flat car used to protect overhanging loads or used between carrying cars loaded with long material.
IMPACT REGISTER — An appliance placed in a car with a shipment which is both a time clock and a measuring device to record the amount of shock the car received enroute.
IMPORT — To receive goods from a foreign country.
IN BOND SHIPMENT — An import or export shipment which has not been cleared by Federal customs officials.
INBOUND TRAIN — A train arriving at a yard or terminal.
INDEPENDENT BRAKE VALVE (Air Brake) — A brake valve for operating the locomotive brakes independently of the train brakes.
INDICATION — The information conveyed by the aspect of a signal.
INDUSTRIAL CARRIER; INDUSTRIAL LINE; OR INDUSTRIAL ROAD — A short railroad owned or controlled by one or more of the principal industries served by it.
INFLAMMABLE LIQUIDS — Liquids that give off vapors which become combustible at a certain temperature.
INITIAL CARRIER — The railroad on which a shipment originates.
INITIAL POINT — The location at which a shipment originates.
INLAND CARRIER — A transportation line which hauls export or import traffic between ports and inland points.
INSULATED RAIL JOINT — A rail joint which arrests the flow of electric current from rail to rail, as at the end of a track circuit, by means of nonconductors separating rail ends and other metal parts.
INTER — Between.
INTERCHANGE — The exchange of cars between railroads at specified junction points.
INTERCHANGE POINT — The location where cars are transferred from one road to another.
INTERCHANGE TRACK — A track on which freight is delivered by one railroad to another.
INTERLINE — Between one or more railroads.
INTERLINE FREIGHT — Freight moving from point of origin to destination over the lines of two or more railroads.
INTERLINE WAYBILL — A waybill covering the movement of freight over two or more railroads.
INTERLOCKING — An arrangement of signals and switches "interlocked" in such a way that their movements must succeed each other in a predetermined order so that a clear indication cannot be given simultaneously on conflicting routes. They are found at a crossing of two railroads, a drawbridge, a junction, or entering or leaving a terminal or yard.
INTERLOCKING LIMITS — The tracks between the extreme opposing home signals of an interlocking.
INTERMEDIATE CARRIER — A railroad over which a shipment moves but on which neither the point of origin nor destination is located.
INTERMEDIATE CLAUSE — A clause or basis contained in a tariff to provide for rates to a point not named therein, but which is intermediate to points that are named.
INTERMEDIATE POINT — A location between two other points specifically named.
INTERSTATE COMMERCE ACT — An act of Congress regulating the practices, rates and rules of transportation lines engaged in handling interstate traffic.
INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION — The U.S. Government regulating body which has jurisdiction over railroad matters.
INTERSTATE TRAFFIC — Traffic moving from a point in one State to a point in another State or between points in the same State, but passing within or through another State enroute.
IN THE CLEAR — A car (or train) is in the clear when it has passed over a switch and frog so far that another car (or train) can pass without collision.
IN THE HOLE (Slang) — In a siding.
INTRA — Within.
INTRA-PLANT SWITCHING — The moving of cars from one place to another within the yards of a plant or industry.
INTRASTATE TRAFFIC — Traffic having origin, destination and entire transportation within the same State.
IRON (Slang) — See SWITCH.
JIB (Slang) (Derrick or Crane) — More properly called Boom.
JOINT AGENT — A person having authority to transact business for two or more railroads.
JOINT BAR — A steel bar used to fasten together the ends of rails; sometimes called a Splice Bar. Joint bars are used in pairs, one on each side of the rail, and are designed to fit the space between head and base (fishing space) closely. They are held in place by track bolts and suitable accessory equipment.
JOINT RATE — A rate applicable from a point located on one railroad to a point located on another railroad, made by agreement and published in a single tariff under proper concurrence of all railroads over which the rate applies.
JOURNAL — The end of the axle which moves in the bearings.
JOURNAL BEARING — A combination of rollers and races or a block of metal (usually brass or bronze) in contact with the journal, on which the load rests. In car construction, the term, when unqualified, means a car axle journal bearing. Also see ROLLER BEARINGS.
JOURNAL BOX — The metal housing which encloses the journal of a car axle, the journal bearing and wedge, and which holds the oil and lubricating device for lubricating the journal.
JOURNAL BOX LUBRICATOR — A device for supplying oil to a car journal bearing. There are two basic types; those depending on wicking (capillary) action to feed oil to the journal, and devices which feed oil to the journal by mechanical means. Those depending on capillary action are pads, some of which depend on the resiliency of the pad itself for working contact with the journal, and others which are pressed against the journal by springs.
JOURNAL BRASS — A Journal Bearing.
JUMPER — A flexible cable composed of one or more conductors of electric current, insulated from one another and covered with suitable material to resist abrasion, used to connect electrically the controller circuits between cars or locomotives.
JUNCTION POINT — (1) A point at which a branch-line track connects with a main-line track. (2) A location at which two or more railroads interchange cars over connecting tracks.
KEEPER (Switch-Stand) — See LATCH.
KICK (Slang) — The act of pushing one or more cars at a speed sufficient to allow free forward movement into selected tracks when uncoupled and engine power reduced.
KNOWN DAMAGE — Damage discovered before or at the time of delivery of a shipment.
KNUCKLE (Coupler) — The rotating coupling hook by which coupling is effected when the knuckle is locked by the catch or lock.
KNUCKLE PIN (Coupler) — The pin holding the knuckle in the jaws of the coupler. Sometimes called pivot pin.
KNUCKLE THROWER — A device which throws the knuckle of a car coupler open when the uncoupling lever is operated.
LADDER — The main track of a yard from which individual tracks lead off. This track is also called a lead track.
LADING — Freight or cargo making up a shipment.
LATCH (Switch-Stand) — A device for catching and holding the lever of a switch stand in position; also called a switch keeper.
LATERAL MOTION — The motion which takes place, crosswise of the track, of all car parts except the wheels and axles. This lateral motion, or end play results from the flexibility which must be provided in truck structure in order to permit easy and safe negotiation of track curves.
LAWFUL RATE — A rate published in conformity with the provisions of the regulatory law and which does not violate any other provisions of such law.
LEAD TRACK — An extended track connecting either end of a yard with main track.
LESS THAN CARLOAD — The quantity of freight less than that required for the application of a carload rate.
LESS THAN CARLOAD RATE — A rate applicable to a less than carload shipment.
LIGHT ENGINE — An engine moving without caboose or cars attached.
LIGHTER — A flat-bottomed boat usually used in inland waterways.
LIGHTERAGE LIMITS — The limits of the area within which freight is handled by lighters or barges under certain lightering charges, rules and regulations.
LIGHTERING — The hauling of freight on lighters or barges.
LIGHT WEIGHT — The weight of any empty freight car.
LIMITED SPEED — Not exceeding 45 miles per hour.
LINE-HAUL — The movement of freight over the tracks of a railroad from one town or city to another town or city (not a switching service).
LINE-HAUL SWITCHING — The moving of cars within yard or switching limits of a station, preceding or following a line-haul move.
LIVE STOCK CAR — A special freight car for handling of live stock.
LIVE STOCK WAYBILL — A special waybill used for shipments of live stock showing feeding and watering instructions.
LOAD LIMIT — The maximum load in pounds which the car is designed to carry.
LOCAL RATE — A rate applying between stations located on the same railroad.
LOCAL WAYBILL — A waybill covering the movement of freight over a single railroad.
LOCOMOTIVE — See ENGINE.
LONG-AND-SHORT CLAUSE — The Fourth Section of the Interstate Commerce Act prohibits railroads from charging more for a shorter than for a longer haul over the same route, except by special permission of the Interstate Commerce Commission.
LONG TON — 2,240 pounds. Also called gross ton.
LOOKOUT (Caboose) — See CUPOLA.
LORRY — A small four-wheel push car used in railroad construction and maintenance work for moving rails, ties, etc.
LOW RAIL — The inner rail of a curve which is maintained at grade while the opposite or outer rail is elevated.
LOW SIDE GONDOLA — A gondola car with sides and ends 36 in. high or less.
MAIN IRON (Slang) — Main track.
MAIN RESERVOIR (Air Brake) — A tank on an engine for storing the main air supply. So called in distinction from the auxiliary reservoirs under each car.
MAIN TRACK — A designated track upon which trains are operated by timetable, train order, or both, or the use of which is governed by block signals.
MAKE A JOINT (Slang) — To couple cars.
MANIFEST — A description of the contents of a shipment.
MANIFEST TRAIN — A scheduled freight train.
MANUAL BLOCK SIGNAL SYSTEM — A block signal system wherein the use of each block is governed by block signals controlled manually.
MARKED CAPACITY — The carrying capacity of a car as marked or stencilled on the car.
MARKER — Front and Rear signals of a train. (flags or lamps)
MARKING OFF — (1) Reporting as not available for work. (2) The act of filling out the employees time slip with the time released from duty.
MARKING UP — Reporting as available for duty.
MAXIMUM RATE — The highest rate that may be charged.
MEAT RACK (Refrigerator Car). — The supports near the ceiling from which meat is suspended. Also called Beef Rail.
MECHANICAL REFRIGERATOR CAR — A car equipped with a diesel powered refrigerating unit under thermostatic control.
MEDIUM SPEED — Not exceeding 30 miles per hour.
MEMORANDUM BILL OF LADING — The duplicate copy of a bill of lading.
MEMO WAYBILL — Memorandum waybill. A waybill used when the agent does not have sufficient information to determine the freight charges. It contains adequate information to enable yards to properly handle car.
MERCHANDISE CAR — A car containing several less-than-carload shipments.
MILEAGE ALLOWANCE — An allowance based on distance made by railroads to owners of privately owned freight cars.
MILEAGE RATE — Rates applicable according to distance.
MILLING IN TRANSIT — The stopping of grain, lumber, etc., at point located between the points of origin and destination, for the purpose of milling.
MINIMUM CHARGE — The least charge for which a shipment will be handled.
MINIMUM RATE — The lowest rate that may be charged.
MINIMUM WEIGHT — The least weight at which a shipment is handled at a carload rate.
MIXED CARLOAD — A carload of different articles in a single consignment.
MIXED CARLOAD RATE — A rate applicable to a carload of different articles in a single consignment.
MUDHOP (Slang) — A yard clerk.
NARROW GAGE (Track) — When the distance between the heads of the rails is less than 4 ft. 8 in. See BROAD GAGE, STANDARD GAGE, and GAGE OF TRACK.
NESTED — Packed one within another.
NET TON — 2,000 pounds.
NET TON-MILE — The movement of a ton of freight one mile.
NET WEIGHT — (1) The weight of an article clear of packing and container. (2) As applied to a carload, the weight of the entire contents of the car.
NON-AGENCY STATION — A station which does not have an agent. Also called a closed station.
NORMAL SPEED — The maximum authorized speed shown in the timetable.
OFFICE CAR — Car used by railway officials while traveling.
ON THE GROUND (Slang) — On the ties, not on the rails, as derailed train.
OPPOSING SIGNALS — Signals which govern movements in opposite directions on the same track.
PACKAGE CAR — A car containing several less-than-carload shipments.
PACKAGE FREIGHT — Merchandise shipped in less-than-carload quantities.
PALLET — A small portable platform for holding material for storage or transportation.
PANTOGRAPH — A device located on top of electric equipment which collects power from an overhead contact wire by means of a sliding contact shoe.
PAPER RATE — A published rate under which no traffic moves.
PARTICIPATING CARRIER (Tariff) — A railroad which is a party, under concurrence, to a tariff issued by another railroad or by a tariff publishing agent.
PAWL (Brake-Wheel) — A pivoted bar adapted to fall into the notches or teeth of a wheel as a ratchet.
PLUG DOOR — A door on refrigerator or box cars which is flush with side of car when closed. To open, it is swung out and rolled to one side. Also called Sliding Flush Door.
POINT OF ORIGIN — The station at which a shipment is received by the railroad from the shipper.
POOL CAR — Specially equipped cars of different ownerships assigned to a specific company or location.
PORT OF ENTRY — A port at which foreign goods are admitted into the receiving country.
PREPAID — A term denoting that transportation charges have been or are to be paid at the point of shipment.
PREPAY — Pay before or in advance.
PREPAY STATION — A station to which the transportation charges on shipments must be prepaid - generally a non-agency station.
PRIVATE CAR — A car having other than railroad ownership.
PRIVATE SIDING — A side-track owned or leased by an individual or firm.
PRO. NUMBER — Pro. is the abbreviation of the word progressive. A pro number is usually applied by the Agent on freight bills, way-bills, etc. for control purposes as part of the accounting procedure.
PROPORTIONAL RATE — A rate specifically published to be used only as a factor in making a combination through rate. A rate published from New York to Chicago to apply only on traffic destined to points beyond Chicago would be a proportional rate.
PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION — A name usually given to a State body having control of, or regulating public utilities.
PUBLISHING AGENT — A person authorized by transportation lines to publish tariffs of rates, rules and regulations for their account.
PULL THE PIN (Slang) — (1) Uncouple a car by pulling up the coupling pin. (2) An expression meaning to resign or leave a job.
PUSHER — An extra engine at the rear of a train used to assist a train in climbing a grade.
RAIL — A length of track, usually 39 feet long. Also see TRACK.
RAIL BOND — An electrical conductor for bridging joints between rails for the purpose of carrying electrical current as part of a track circuit.
RAIL JOINT — A fastening designed to unite abutting ends of rails.
RAILWAY LABOR ACT — A Federal Act providing for adjustment of disputes between railroads and employees.
RATCHET — A serrated edge like that of a saw, sometimes straight and sometimes on a wheel, into which a pawl engages, for producing or (more commonly) restraining motion. See BRAKE RATCHET, and PAML.
RATE SCALE — A table of rates graduated according to distances or zones.
REAR OF A SIGNAL — The side of the Signal from which the indication is received.
RECEIVING TRACK — A track used for arriving trains.
RECLAIM — See PER DIEM RECLAIM.
RECONSIGNMENT — A service extended by the railroad to the owner of the freight (shipper, consignee) permitting a change to the waybill in the name of the shipper, consignee, destination, route or other instructions to effect delivery of the car providing no back haul is involved.
RED BOARD — A fixed signal to Stop. Also see BOARD.
REDUCED SPEED — Prepared to stop short of train or obstruction.
REEFER (Slang) — See REFRIGERATOR CAR.
REFINING IN TRANSIT — The stopping of shipments of sugar, oil, etc., at a point located between the points of origin and destination to be refined.
REFRIGERATION CHARGE — A fixed charge for refrigeration from shipping point to destination or for a portion of the trip.
REFRIGERATOR CAR — A car with insulated walls, floor and roof, for carrying commodities that need cooling in transit. There are two major types: those which depend upon ice or ice and salt for cooling and those which are cooled by mechanical refrigerating equipment. See MECHANICAL REFRIGERATION.
REGULAR TRAIN — A train authorized by a timetable schedule.
RELEASE COCK — See RELEASE VALVE.
RELEASE ROD — A small iron rod generally located at the side of a car for the purpose of operating the air brake release valve.
RELEASE VALVE (Air Brake) — A valve attached to the auxiliary reservoir for reducing the air pressure when the locomotive is detached so as to release the brakes.
REMOTE UNIT — See RADIO CONTROLLED ENGINE.
REPAIR TRACK — A track used for car repairs.
RESERVOIR (Air Brake) — A cylindrical container for the storage of air under pressure. Main reservoirs of large capacity are located in locomotives and under all motor cars having air compressors; auxiliary and emergency reservoirs are located under the cars.
RESTRICTED SPEED — A speed that will permit stopping short of another track, obstruction, stop signal, or switch not properly lined, and looking out for broken rail, not exceeding 20 miles per hour.
RETAINING VALVE — A small manually positioned valve located near the brake wheel for retaining part of the brake cylinder pressure, to aid in retarding the acceleration of a train in descending long grades.
REVERSER — A device for changing the direction of motion of the locomotive by reversing the traction motor field connections.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The property owned by a railroad over which tracks have been laid.
RIP — Car in need of repair.
RIP TRACK — See REPAIR TRACK.
ROADBED — The foundation on which the track and ballast rest.
ROAD HAUL — See LINE HAUL.
ROADWAY — See RIGHT-OF-WAY.
ROLL BY (Slang) — Making a check of cars as they pass.
ROLLER BEARING — The general term applied to a group of journal bearings which depend upon the action of a set of rollers, in order to reduce rotational friction.
ROUNDHOUSE — Building, circular in design, used to house engines while being serviced or repaired.
ROUTE — (1) noun - The course or direction that a shipment moves. (2) verb - To designate the course or direction a shipment shall move.
RULE "G" — A railroad operating rule prohibiting the possession or use of intoxicants or narcotics while on duty.
RUMP RAIL — A side slat on a single-deck stock car made heavier than the usual slats. It is placed about four feet above the floor to resist movement of cattle against the car sides.
RUNNING GEAR — A general term applied to and including the wheels, axles, springs, axle boxes, frames and other carrying parts of a truck or locomotive.
RUNNING TRACK — (1) A track designated in the timetable upon which movements may be made subject to prescribed signals and rules, or special instructions. (2) A track reserved for movement through a yard.
SANDERS — Devices operated by air for applying sand to the rail in front of or behind the driving wheels of the engine.
SCALE HOUSE — Structure erected to house weight recording mechanism used in weighing freight cars.
SCALE TEST CAR — A compact car equipped with weights for the testing of track scales.
SCALE TRACK — A storage track for cars needing to be weighed.
SCHEDULE — That part of a timetable which prescribes class, direction, number, and movement for a regular train.
SEALS — Metal strips, designed for one-time use, applied to the hasp of closed freight car doors. To remove, they must be broken. They are used to indicate whether or not the contents have been tampered with while in transit. They are stamped with a name, initial and/or number for identification.
SECONDARY TRACK — A designated track upon which trains or engines may be operated without timetable authority, train orders or block signals.
SELF ALIGNING COUPLER — A coupler which has a taper shank rather than a straight shank to prevent the jacknifing of cars.
SERVICE APPLICATION — A reduction of air pressure in the brake pipe at a rate that will produce an application of the locomotive and train brakes and a gradual speed reduction.
SET-UP — A term denoting that an article is put together in its complete state - not knocked down.
SHANTY — (1) Small building erected along right-of-way to provide shelter. (2) See CABOOSE.
SHIFTING — See SWITCHING.
SHIPMENT IN BOND — See IN BOND SHIPMENT.
SHIPPER — Person or firm from whom shipment originates. Also called consignor.
SHIPPER'S EXPORT DECLARATION — A form required by the Treasury Department and filled out by a shipper showing the value, weight, consignee, destination, etc., of shipments to be exported.
SHIPPER'S LOAD AND COUNT — A term denoting that the contents of a car were loaded and counted by the shipper and not checked or verified by the railroad.
SHIPPING ORDER — Shipping instructions to the railroad for forwarding all goods; usually the second copy of the bill of lading.
SHOP — Term applied to structure where building and repairing railroad equipment is performed, e.g., cars, locomotives, etc.
SHORT OF DESTINATION — Before reaching final destination.
SHORT TON — 2,000 pounds.
SIDE BAY CABOOSE — A caboose car having side bay windows instead of a cupola. This permits the train crew to look along the side of a train, especially when rounding curves, for detection of hot boxes or other trouble.
SIDE TRACK — A track adjacent to the main track for purposes other than for meeting and passing trains.
SIDING — A track adjacent to a main or a secondary track for meeting or passing trains.
SIGNBORRD — Information stencilled on side of car pertaining to empty car movement instructions.
SILL (Car) — The main longitudinal members of a car underframe.
SINGLE TRACK — A main track upon which trains are operated in both directions.
SKATE — A metal skid placed on rail in a hump yard to stop cars from running out the lower end of the classification yard.
SKEW BRIDGE — A bridge which crosses a passageway at other than a right angle.
SLAVE UNIT — See RADIO CONTROLLED ENGINE.
SLOW BOARD — A signal indication to proceed at slow speed. See BOARD.
SLOW SPEED — Not exceeding 15 miles per hour.
SOLID TRACK (Slang) — Track full of cars.
SPECIAL EQUIPMENT — Freight cars designed to carry specific commodities, some of which contain devices to protect and/or aid in handling shipments.
SPLICE BAR — See JOINT BAR.
SPOT — To place a car in a designated position or specific location usually for loading or unloading such as at a warehouse door.
SPOT FOR AIR — To position the cars in the yard so as to utilize a central compressed air supply to charge the brake system.
SPOT SYSTEM — A system in which cars and locomotives undergoing repairs are classified and then moved progressively from one spot to another. At each spot different items of work are done by a unit force.
SPOTTING (Car) — The placing of a car where required to be accessible for loading or unloading.
SPRING SWITCH — A switch equipped with a spring mechanism arranged to restore the switch points to normal position after having been trailed through.
SPUR TRACK — A stub track extending out from a main or other track.
STANDARD GAGE — A distance of 4 ft. 8 1/2 in. between the heads of the rails. See BROAD GAGE, NARROW GAGE and GAGE OF TRACK.
STANDARD RATE — A rate established via direct routes from one point to another.
STANDARD ROUTE — The line or lines which maintain standard rates.
STOCK CAR — A car for the transportation of live stock equipped with slatted sides, single or double deck and sometimes with feed and water troughs.
STOPPING IN TRANSIT — The holding of a shipment by the carrier on order of the owner after the transportation movement has started and before it is completed.
STORAGE IN TRANSIT — The stopping of freight at a point located between the point of origin and destination, to be stored and forwarded at a later date.
STORAGE TRACK — A track on which cars are placed when not in service.
STRING (Slang) — Two or more freight cars coupled together, as a string of cars.
STUB TRACK — A track connected at one end only.
SUPERIOR TRAIN — A train having precedence over another train.
SUPPLEMENT (Tariff) — A publication containing additions to and/or changes in a tariff.
SWITCH — (1) A connection between two lines of track to permit cars or trains to pass from one track to the other track. (2) To move cars from one place to another within a defined territory such as an industry, a yard, or a terminal.
SWITCH BACK — Track constructed in a series of zigzag curves in mountainous terrain to reduce rate of climb or descent.
SWITCH ENGINE — A locomotive used for switching cars in yards and terminals. Sometimes termed switcher. Usually built to carry all its weight on the driving wheels.
SWITCHING — The moving of cars from one place to another within a terminal, a yard, or an industry.
SWITCH LIST — A list of freight cars in track standing order showing cars by initial, number, type of car, and showing where cars are to be switched as required by local practice.
SWITCH LOCK — A fastener, usually a spring padlock, used to secure the switch or derail stand in place.
SWITCHMAN — A yard brakeman.
SWITCH ORDER — An order to move a car from one place to another within switching limits.
SWITCH STAND — A device by which a switch is thrown, locked, and its position indicated. It consists essentially of a base, spindle, lever and connecting rod, and is usually furnished with a lamp and a banner signal.
SWITCH TARGET — A visual day signal fixed on the spindle of a switch stand, or the circular flaring collar fitted around the switch-lamp lens, and painted a distinctive color to indicate the position of the switch.
SWITCH TENDER — Train service employee responsible for aligning tracks for engine and car movements by throwing switches.
TAMPER — A power-driven machine for compacting ballast under ties.
TANK CAR — A car used for carrying liquids, such as oil, molasses, vinegar, acid, etc.
TANK DOME — A vertical cylinder attached to the top of a tank car. It permits the tank proper to be filled to full cubical capacity, which would be impossible if there were no allowance for expansion in the dome.
TAP LINE (Slang) — A short railroad usually owned or controlled by the industries which it serves and "tapping" (connecting with) a trunk line.
TARE WEIGHT — (1) The weight of a container and the material used for packing. (2) The weight of any empty freight car.
TEAM TRACK — A track on which cars are placed for the use of the public in loading or unloading freight.
TERMINAL CARRIER — The railroad making delivery of a shipment at its destination.
TERMINAL CHARGE — A charge made for services performed at terminals.
TERMINALS — Points where employees in road train and engine service originate and/or terminate their tour of duty.
TEST WEIGHT CAR — See SCALE TEST CAR.
THIRD RAIL — An electric conductor located alongside the running rail from which power is collected by means of a sliding contact shoe attached to the truck of electric equipment.
THIRD-RAIL SHOE (Electric Locomotive) — An insulated metallic sliding contact, mounted on the truck of an electric locomotive for collecting current from an insulated third-rail located alongside the running rails. Positive contact between shoe and rail is maintained by gravity, a spring or by pneumatic pressure.
THROUGH RATE — A rate applicable from point of origin to destination. A through rate may be either a joint rate or a combination of two or more rates.
THROUGH TRAIN — A train which does not stop at all stations on its route.
TIE 'EM DOWN (Slang) — Applying hand brake of car or cars to prevent them from rolling free.
TIE ON (Slang) — Couple on.
TIE UP (Slang) — Stop for a meal or for rest.
TIE PLATE — A metal plate at least 6 inches wide and long enough to provide a safe bearing area on the tie, with a shoulder to restrain outward movement of the rail.
TIMETABLE — The authority for the movement of regular trains subject to the rules. It contains classified schedules with special instructions relating to the movement of trains and engines.
TON-MILE — (1) A unit used in comparing freight earnings or expenses -- the amount earned from, or the cost of, hauling a ton of freight one mile. (2) The movement of a ton of freight one mile.
TOOL TRAIN (Slang) — Wreck train used for clearing up derailments.
TOWER — Building of sufficient height erected along right-of-way to permit maximum viewing. May house yardmaster, switch lever operator block operator, or dispatcher.
TRACER — (1) A request to trace a shipment for the purpose of expediting its movement or establishing delivery. (2) A request for an answer to a communication.
TRACK — The space between the rails and space of not less than 4 feet outside each rail.
TRACKAGE RIGHT — Right obtained by one railroad to operate its trains over the tracks of another railroad.
TRACK CAR — A self propelled car including: Burro Cranes, Highway Rail Cars, Detector Cars, Weed Burners, Tie Tampers, and other similar equipment. This type equipment may not operate signals or shunt track circuits.
TRACK CHECK — An inventory of cars in track standing order. See SWITCH LIST.
TRACK CIRCUIT — An electrical circuit which includes the rails and the wheels of the train. Used for controlling signal devices (Fixed signals as well as flashers and gates at crossings).
TRAFFIC CONTROL SYSTEM (TCS) — A block signal system under which train movements are authorized by block signals, whose indications supersede the superiority of trains for both opposing and following movements on the same track.
TRAILING MOVEMENT — The movement of a train over the points of a switch which face in the direction in which the train is moving.
TRAILING POINT SWITCH — A switch, the points of which face away from approaching traffic.
TRAIN — An engine or more than one engine coupled, with or without cars, displaying a marker.
TRAIN DISPATCHER — An employee responsible for the movement of trains. Sometimes called "Train Runner."
TRAIN LINE — The complete line of air brake pipes in a train. These lines include the rigid piping secured under the cars and the flexible connections between cars and the locomotive. See BRAKE PIPE.
TRAIN-MILE — The movement of a train one mile.
TRAIN OF SUPERIOR RIGHT — A train given precedence by timetable.
TRAIN OF SUPERIOR DIRECTION — A train given precedence in the direction specified by timetable as between opposing trains of the same class.
TRANS-SHIP — To transfer goods from one transportation line to another, particularly from a rail to a water carrier, or vice versa.
TRANSIT PRIVILEGE — A service granted to a shipment en route such as milling, compressing, refining, etc.
TRANSIT RATE — A rate restricted in its application to traffic which has been or will be milled, stored or otherwise specially treated in transit.
TRANSPOSING — The act of rearranging numbers or letters from their proper order.
TRICK (Slang) — Shift or hours of duty.
TRI-LEVEL CAR — A three level freight car used for transporting automobiles.
TRIPLE LOAD — A shipment requiring the use of two carrying cars with an idler car between them.
TRUCK — A general term for the complete four wheel freight car assembly which supports the car body at each end. It is attached to the body by a pair of center plates which function as a pivot. See CENTER PLATE.
TRUNKLINE — A transportation line operating over an extensive territory.
UNASSIGNED CAR — A car, usually with some interior loading devices, that is not assigned to a particular industry or commodity.
UNCLAIMED FREIGHT — Freight which has not been called for by the consignee or owner.
UNCOUPLING LEVER OR UNCOUPLING ROD — A rod with a bent handle forming a lever, usually attached to the end sill, by which the lock of the automatic coupler is opened and the cars uncoupled without going between them. The lever proper is the part attached to the rod and operating the unlocking mechanism, but in the case of freight cars the lever and rod are generally made in one piece.
UNIFORM DEMURRAGE RULES — Schedules providing rules and charges for demurrage which are, in general, used throughout the United States, having the approval of, but not prescribed by, the Interstate Commerce Commission. See DEMURRAGE.
UNIFORM FREIGHT CLASSIFICATION — A listing of articles (commodities) showing their assigned class rating (a percentage of first class) to be used in determining freight rates, together with governing rules and regulations.
VENTILATED BOX CAR — Similar to an ordinary box car, but arranged for ventilation and suitable for the transportation of produce or other foodstuffs not needing refrigeration.
WAYBILL — A document prepared at the point of origin of a shipment, showing the point of origin, destination, route, consignor, consignee, description of shipment and amount charged for the transportation service, and generally forwarded with the shipment to the agent at destination.
WAY CAR (Slang) — See CABOOSE.
WAYSIDE SIGNAL — A fixed signal located along the track right-of-way. See FIXED SIGNAL.
WEATHER INTERFERENCE — Natural conditions which render loading or unloading a car impracticable.
WEIGHT AGREEMENT — An agreement between shipper and carrier, usually following a series of weighing tests, under which carrier agrees to accept shipper's goods at certain agreed weights.
WELL CAR — See DEPRESSED CENTER FLAT CAR.
WHEEL FLANGE — The projecting edge or rim on the circumference of a car wheel for keeping it on the rail.
WHITE SHIRT (Slang) — Any railroad official.
WYE — A triangular arrangement of tracks on which locomotives, cars, and trains may be turned to reverse direction.
YARD — A system of tracks branching from a common lead or ladder track, with defined limits, used for switching, making up trains, or the storing of cars.
YARD CLERK — Person engaged in clerical work in and around yards and terminals.
YARD FOREMAN — See CONDUCTOR.
YARDING IN TRANSIT — Unloading, storing, sorting, etc. of forest products in transit.
YARDMASTER — Person responsible for control of train and engine operations within a yard.
YARD SWITCH — Device used to alter direction from one track to another.