---
title: "KiwiRail Glossary"
sourceName: "Official site of KiwiRail"
sourceUrl: "https://shield.kiwirail.co.nz/content/latest/83608-Glossary-pdf-en.pdf"
regions:
  - "NZ"
lastUpdated: "2025-07-06"
collectedBy: "A. Piatrou"
---

ABSOLUTE SIGNAL — A signal that must not be passed at “Stop” without the authority of the Train Controller or the Signaller as provided for in the Rail Operating Rules and includes Block Entry and Station Entry Boards.
ACCESS AGREEMENT — An agreement between Access Provider and Rail Operating Company pursuant to which the Access Provider grants the Rail Operating Company certain access rights to the National Rail System.
ACCESS PROVIDER — The entity who controls the use of that railway line by rail operators (including that person if it is also a rail operator), whether or not that person engages rail personnel to exercise or assist in exercising that control on its behalf; but does not include those rail personnel.
APIS — Access Provider Interoperability Standards. Suite of documents progressively replacing the National Rail System Standards.
ACCESS RIGHTS — A Rail Operating Company’s rights to use the Rail Network as granted to it by the Access Provider under an Access Agreement.
ACCIDENT — An occurrence associated with the operation of a rail vehicle or the use of railway infrastructure or railway premises that causes: - the death of, or serious injury to, individuals; or - significant damage to property.
ACTIVE LEVEL CROSSING — A level crossing protected by flashing lights, bells, gates and/or barriers.
AC TRACTION POWER — 25kv alternating current power supplied to rail vehicles by overhead line equipment.
ADDRESSEE — The person to whom an operating authority is addressed and who is responsible for ensuring the provisions of the authority are carried out.
ADHESION — The grip which the wheels have on the rail dependent upon weight, track condition and weather conditions before wheel slip occurs.
ADJACENT — Near to, close to, or beside.
ADVANCE CAUTION — A flashing yellow aspect which informs the Operator that the next signal may be at caution.
ADVERSE WEATHER RESTRICTION (LEVEL 2) — A speed restriction of 40 km/h or less applied to specified areas due to a high risk of weather conditions damaging the line.
AIR BRAKE — A braking system activated by change in air pressure.
ALARMS (LEVEL CROSSINGS) — Flashing lights and bells used to protect active level crossings.
ALERT — A method of communicating amendments to the Rail Operating Rules Framework elements via the Shield application.
ALL CONCERNED — Everyone who is involved or affected in the rail corridor. All persons that apply or come in contact or requires the information to undertake the task safely.
ATSB — All Trains Stop Board. A board requiring all rail movements to stop before the board unless permission to pass has been received from the person responsible for movements.
ATC — Alternative Train Crewing. Single person crewing of locomotive-hauled main line trains where the required standards of radio communication, operating procedures and locomotive cab environment are met.
ACOP — Approved Code of Practice. Sets out WorkSafe’s expectations about how to comply with legal duties imposed by HSWA and regulations. Other practices can be used to achieve compliance as long as the level of health and safety is equivalent to, or higher, to that in an ACOP.
APPROVED RAIL VEHICLE REGISTER — A central register of rail vehicles authorised to run on the National Rail System.
AREA INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGER — The person authorised to manage track, structures, and infrastructure maintenance matters for a specified area.
ARRIVAL ROAD — A road on which trains berth upon arrival at a yard.
ASP CHANNEL — A radio system channel used for shunting which is usually low power and short range.
ASPECT (SIGNAL) — A visual indication of the status of a signal that is given to the Operator.
ARPO — Assistant Rail Protection Officer. Responsible for ensuring the directions of the Rail Protection Officer are carried out.
ASSISTING MOTIVE POWER UNIT — A motive power unit other than the train motive power attached to the train.
AEA — Auckland Electrified Area. All electrified lines between Pukekohe and Swanson.
AUCKLAND METRO AREA — See also Auckland Metro Area.
ASP — Audio Shunting Procedures. ASP consists of dedicated UHF channels used to communicate between Rail Operators, shunt locomotives and yard offices. Channels are allocated in terminal local instructions.
ALCAM — Australasian Level Crossing Assessment Model. An assessment tool which may be used to: - identify key potential risks at level crossings (both road and pedestrian crossings); - assist in the prioritisation of crossings for upgrades; and - support the decision making process when determining the most cost effective treatments.
AUTHORISE — To give formal written, spoken, or signalled authority for an action.
AUTHORISED FENCING — Safety barrier systems authorised for use to create a physical structure between rail personnel and a running line.
AUTOMATIC COUPLER — A fitting on the end of a rail vehicle that engages with a compatible fitting on an adjacent rail vehicle to connect the vehicles together.
AUTOMATIC EMERGENCY BRAKE — Automatic maximum application of the air brake system, when there is an occurrence of: - a vigilance device is not correctly acknowledged by the Operator - train overspeed - low MR air pressure - brake pipe continuity failure, such as a burst hose or train parting - passenger emergency brake activation - ETCS/TMS system activation - signal trip activation
ASR — Automatic Signalling Rules. The prescribed safe working rules which support the application of Automatic Signalling.
ATWS — Automatic Track Warning System. A system that gives trackside personnel audible and/or visible warning of the approach of trains independently of the signalling system.
AVI — Automatic Vehicle Identification. Technology that allows for the automatic identification of vehicles without requiring manual intervention or stopping the vehicle. It typically uses radio frequency identification (RFID) technology, where vehicles carry RFID tags that transmit unique identifiers to readers.
AXLE COUNTER — A form of train detection equipment provided in place of the conventional track circuit. The system typically consists of wheel sensors and (electronic) evaluation units for counting axles (technically wheels) of the train both into and out of a section. The section will remain occupied until the number of axles out equals the number of wheels in, or a reset has been completed by an authorised person.
AXLE LOAD — The weight on any one axle (tonnes).
BACKSHUNT — A dead-end line leading off a loop line or siding to allow shunting movements to be carried out without fouling adjacent roads. The end of the backshunt may be defined by a concrete or timber buffer stop.
BAD ORDER — Status used to describe equipment requiring repairs and therefore unsuitable for operational use.
BAD ORDERED – RUN TO DESTINATION — Equipment that is Bad Ordered (requiring repairs) and able to run to its intended destination. At destination the equipment is tagged to be sent to the nearest depot for repair.
BALISE — ETCS transporters between the rails at various locations to electronically provide information to the train to read as it passes over it.
BALLAST — A layer of crushed stone to form the track bed on which the railway sleepers and track are laid.
BANNER INDICATOR — Visual instrument which supplies information about the next signal in advance when there is restricted sighting distance on this signal.
BARRIER ARM — A boom that when lowered blocks vehicular access to the railway corridor at a level crossing.
HALF ARM BARRIER — See Also Half Arm Barrier.
BASE CALL — A radio communication to Train Control either by voice or using Seicall tones (ID).
BEDPLATE — A metal plate that provides a firm fastening of the rail to the sleeper.
BERTH — To stop at a predetermined location usually in a yard, siding, or at a space alongside a station platform.
BI-DIRECTIONAL (BI-DI) — Allowing for normal travel in either direction according to the infrastructure and system of safe working in use.
BLEEDING OFF — Releasing air from brake cylinders of vehicles by a wire attached to a release valve to allow the vehicle to move freely.
BLIND SIDE — This is the side of the train away from the platform, or the opposite side from which the Locomotive Operator will be located. “Blind side” or “offside” applies to the side from which hand signals are not normally given.
BLOCK ENTRY BOARD — Provided in multi-line areas where a signal is not available and defines a boundary for entry into a block section.
BLOCKING — The process of using a Mis.71 track occupancy cross check or Mis.72 Release Code Blocking with signal blocking to establish a protected work area.
BLOCK OF LINE — A planned shutdown of a section of railway line for larger scale maintenance work.
BLOCK SECTION — A single section of line between the limits of two adjoining interlocked stations / junctions in either single or multi-line area. The block section will permit movements in either both directions or one direction only.
BOARD (SIGNAL) — A sign posted adjacent to the tracks to provide instructions or information to Operators when the use of a signal is not considered appropriate.
BOGIE — A twin or triple axle wheelset. The term bogie is also a historical term used as a unit of measurement when piloting a movement.
BOGIE VEHICLE — A rail vehicle with two twin axle wheel sets.
BOND WIRE — Wire connection between two adjoining rails carrying signalling or traction power.
BRAKE — A system fitted to rolling stock to decelerate, stop, and inhibit further movement. May be achieved by means of: • compressed air, • hydraulic fluid, • by rheostatic or regenerative braking on wheelsets with electric traction motors, or • manually through mechanical means for handbrakes.
BRAKE APPLICATION — The act of applying the air brakes, generally accomplished by the operation of the automatic brake valve on a locomotive.
BCU — Brake Control Unit. Coordinates the rail vehicle’s independent braking systems to calculate the braking force corresponding to the deceleration requested by the Operator, and to distribute the braking force between the different braking systems and between the individual vehicles.
BRAKE CYLINDER — Rail vehicle component that converts air pressure to force, which typically presses a block/pad against the wheel tread or disc producing a retardation force.
BRAKE TEST — A specific test to check the operation of air brake systems on a group of rail vehicles, or a complete train. Types of tests may vary for different types of rail vehicles.
BRAKING DISTANCE — The distance a vehicle will travel from the point when its brakes are fully applied to when it comes to a complete stop.
BRANCH LINE — A secondary line diverging from a more significant main line.
BREAKING-UP — The act of separating wagons in a train consist.
BRIDGE STRIKE — The occurrence of a road vehicle (including the vehicle’s load) colliding with a railway bridge overpass.
BRIDLE — A “D” shaped steel guard which is placed over the hook on standard buffers to keep it from lifting.
BUFFER LOCK — Where the buffer faces pass each other, this is usually caused by a violent bump on a sharp curve. Buffer locked vehicles are unlocked by propelling at slow speed over a short switch thus shunting the vehicles on to two roads.
BUFF FORCE — Longitudinal in-train compressive buffer forces.
BULLETIN — A controlled instruction printed, typed, or handwritten, issued by those authorised in the Rail Operating Rules.
INFORMATION BULLETIN — See also Information Bulletin.
SPECIAL BULLETIN — See also Special Bulletin.
CAB — The area of a motive power unit or track vehicle containing the operating controls and crew workstations.
CALL SIGN — 1. A two or three-letter sequence notified by bulletin, used at worksites as a call sign for all communications to and from a Rail Protection Officer (RPO), Operators or Drivers of Hi-Rail Vehicle and Train Controllers. 2. Used to clearly identify the radio user by role or allocated call sign to rail vehicle/road vehicle.
CANT — The vertical distance (in millimetres) by which one rail is physically raised above the other and measured between the surveyed running edge of the two rails.
CARRIAGE TRAIN — A train comprising a locomotive towing passenger carriages.
CAR YARD — The railway yard primarily used for storage and maintenance of passenger carriages.
CATCH ON — To attach vehicles when the couplers have been brought together and a positive connection has been made.
CATCH POINTS — A type of points installed on main lines as required to intercept runaway rail vehicles.
CATENARY WIRE — Wire attached to the contact wire at regular intervals by vertical wires known as "droppers" or "drop wires" and is supported by traction masts at regular intervals.
CAUTION (SIGNAL ASPECT) — An aspect which advises the train crew that the next signal may be at stop. It is indicated by a single yellow aspect.
CERTIFIED (STATUS) — The status or condition pursuant to a certificate being issued by a Competent Worker.
CERTIFIED (RAIL PERSONNEL) — Rail personnel whose manager has issued a staff 23 authorising full and final certificate of competency identifying the duties to which training and certification has been provided.
CHECK RAIL — Rails placed inside the running rail at particular locations which comes into contact with the back of the wheel flange to guide wheels through points and crossings and on curves.
CLAMP — A method of securing the switch blade to the rail to prevent movement.
CLEAR (A SIGNAL) — To set a signal with a proceed indication.
CLEAR AND COMPLETE — When the last vehicle of a train consist has passed beyond a specified location.
CLEAR TIME — The time specified to be off and clear of the Danger Area.
COMMUNICATION DEVICES — A device that supports effective communication between competent workers.
CMS — Competency Management System. A system that identifies, assesses, and develops the skills and knowledge of workers.
COMPETENT TRACTION PERSON — A Traction person who is deemed competent by Traction Engineering to carry out work on the KiwiRail traction system. It is usually a traction electrician or traction line mechanic who can isolate the overhead line equipment and issue a permit to work.
COMPETENT WORKER — A worker who is qualified and certified as competent to carry out the relevant task.
COMPLETE — When the train consist has not parted.
CABA — Compressed Air Breathing Apparatus. A type of respiratory protection equipment that provides breathable air from cylinders containing compressed air.
CSP — Compulsory Stop Protection. A sequence of boards used to protect rail personnel and rail vehicles from entering a planned protected work area.
CAN — Condition Affecting the Network. Any damage, obstruction or condition that affects the safety of operations in the network.
COC — Conditions of Carriage. Elements of the contract between a carrier of freight or passengers, and the consignor, consignee or passenger.
CONSIST — The set of rail vehicles connected together which form the train.
CONSTRUCTION ZONE — A work zone that is temporarily not part of the rail network, with all rail vehicles prohibited from operating on track in rail mode. The work zone is isolated from the National Rail System and is required to have systems in place to prevent all rail vehicles from entering the zone.
CONTACT WIRE — The wire which supplies power to pantographs, to power electric rail vehicles.
CWR — Continuously Welded Rail. Any rail greater than 75m in length.
CONTROLLED NETWORK — All track where occupancy and movement by rail vehicles is under the control of the Access Provider.
CONTROLLED SIGNAL — A signal that is controlled directly by a Signaller or a Train Controller.
CONVOY — A group of track vehicles not coupled but travelling closely together under a single occupancy authority.
CIMS — Coordinated Incident Management System. New Zealand’s official framework for coordinated incident management across responding agencies.
COUPLE — To join rail vehicles together.
CIMW — Coupled In Motion Weightbridge. Track mounted hardware clamped to the rail that reports rail vehicle weight, wheel impact and bearing data from each rail vehicle that passes over it.
COUPLING LINK — A bar shaped like a kidney with a hole in each end and used for attaching hook and pin drawgear together in place of a coupling hook.
COUPLING SLACK — Free play in the drawgear.
COW CATCHER — A device mounted at the front of a motive power unit to deflect obstacles on the track that might otherwise damage or derail it.
CREW RESOURCE MANAGEMENT — A management system which makes optimum use of all available resources (equipment, procedures, and people) to promote safety and enhance the efficiency of rail operations.
CRISIS — An emergency or unplanned event, announcement, disclosure or set of circumstances that threatens the safety or well-being of employees, customers, community and / or the integrity, performance, reputation, and survival of the organisation.
CRISIS MANAGEMENT — Arrangements to manage emergency situations which require inter-agency support where the situation is beyond the normal manageable scale of operations.
CMT — Crisis Management Team. Comprises executive management personnel from KiwiRail to provide the strategic response to any major incident impacting KiwiRail and / or any of its businesses.
CROSSING LOOP — A running line, secondary to the main line, with entry and exit points connected to the main line, provided primarily for the crossing or passing of trains.
CROSSOVER — A pair of switches either facing or trailing situated between two parallel tracks, allowing a train on cross from one track to the other.
CULVERT — Pipe or box structure to transfer water flow across and beneath the tracks.
CUT IN — 1. To add vehicles to a train in the correct position, or 2. To restore a piece of equipment to its functioning capacity, for example air brakes.
CUT OFF — To lift the hook or disconnect the link between rail vehicles.
DETACH — See also Detach.
CUT OUT — 1. To remove a rail vehicle from a rake, or 2. To disable the braking functionality on a rail vehicle.
DANGER AREA — Unless a safe place exists or has been created, the danger area is: • all space within 4 metres horizontally from the centre of the nearest railway line, and • any distance above or below these 4 metres.
DANGER STOP SIGNAL BOARD — Danger Stop Signal boards are used in place of signals, to stop rail movements. They are either: • a circular disc painted red with a white border, or • a rectangular reflectorised sign with red dot, white background and red border, or • a reflectorised sign with red flashing light at top, secured to rail head.
DANGER ZONE — The zone in which rail personnel may be struck by flying debris from: • couplers or transition heads breaking while catching on, or • placed detonators exploding upon impact.
DARK TERRITORY — Track where the system of safe working does not indicate the real-time position of rail vehicles.
DC TRACTION POWER — Direct Current power supply to overhead traction equipment.
DEFECTIVE SIGNAL — A signal which fails to display the correct indication.
DELEGATE — A competent worker authorised and designated to act in place of another.
DEPOT — The maintenance and repair facility for rolling stock.
DEPOT CONTROLLER — A person responsible for the co-ordination of rail vehicle movements in a designated depot outside of the Controlled Network.
DPPS — Depot Personnel Protection System. A system using personal cards or electronic keys to control derailers and shunting alarms.
DPS — Also called Depot Protection System (DPS).
DERAILER — A two position mechanical device attached to the rail. When seated over the railhead in the 'tripping' position it will deflect an unauthorised low speed movement off the rails resulting in an enforced derailment.
DERAILMENT — An occurrence where one or more rail vehicle wheels leave the rail or track during railway operations.
DE-STRESS — Artificial tensioning of rail to achieve the Design Neutral Temperature.
DETACH — To uncouple a rail vehicle from other rail vehicles.
DETECTABLE — Rail vehicles able to reliably activate track circuits or axle counters.
DETONATOR — A device attached to a rail that explodes on impact, used to attract attention of rail personnel.
DETRAIN — The process of passengers leaving a train.
DETRAINMENT RAMP — A ramp attached to a rail vehicle to facilitate emergency evacuation of passengers.
DIAMOND CROSSING — A special track structure where two routes may cross each other but do not contain switches to allow for transferring from one line to the other.
DIRECTING SIGNAL — A signal used in station limits to direct rail vehicles to the various platforms, sidings, or positions to which the signals apply and protect those lines to which they apply.
DIRECT RELEASE — Braking system which uses a triple valve or direct release distributor, which allows the brake cylinder pressure on the vehicle to be fully vented as soon as the brake pipe pressure starts to increase.
DISABLED TRAIN — A train will be deemed disabled when it: • is unable to continue to the next station unassisted, or • is unable to set back to the station in the rear unassisted, or • has parted and cannot be re-coupled.
DISTANCE SIGHTING MATRIX — A table used to identify the minimum sighting distance of approaching rail vehicles required based on the maximum speed for the line which is to be occupied.
DITCH LIGHTS — Small headlights located lower than the primary headlight on the front of a motive power unit to improve visibility.
DOUBLE BANKING — A method of recovering a disabled train by taking portions of the train to the station in advance.
DOUBLE BERTHING — When two or more trains are berthed at the same location.
DOUBLE BLOCKING — A method of applying a signal blocking control tag command on top of an existing control tag, noting the reason for the additional control tag.
DOUBLE LINE — Two adjacent, parallel, running lines in which trains are generally permitted to travel in one direction only on each line.
DOWN DIRECTION — Trains running away from Otiria in the North Island and away from Picton in the South Island are travelling in the down direction.
DRAFT FORCE — Longitudinal in-train tensile buffer forces.
DRAFTGEAR SLACK — Movement in either direction in the draftgear rubbers and springs.
DED — Dragging Equipment Detector. A trackside device that detects rolling stock equipment that is dragging or disconnected.
DRAWBAR PIN — A round steel bar used to hold coupling links and hooks in standard drawgear and bring buffer faces together.
DRAWGEAR — The system of connecting rail vehicles together. It includes the coupler and uncoupling lever, yoke, draftgear, followers, draftlugs and striker casting.
DRAW HOOK — A hook that is attached to the standard buffer and is used for connecting rail vehicles together.
DRIFTING — Train operating technique when the throttle is closed and the track-train dynamics allow the train to move freely.
DRIVER — A qualified person authorised to operate Hi-Rail vehicles.
DUTY CARD — Role specific task instructions supporting a Triggered Action Response Plan (TARP).
DYNAMIC BRAKE — A brake system that applies a retarding force to the locomotive by using the traction motors as generators.
EASE UP — To bunch up vehicles and bring buffer faces together.
ECMT — East Coast Main Truck. The principal line between Hamilton and Kawerau.
EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION — Ability to successfully send, receive and understand information.
ESO — Electrical Safety Observer. A competent worker who provides electrical safety observation for people and/or plant working close to traction and overhead power lines.
ELECTRICAL SAFETY PERMIT — The necessary authority required when working within the minimum approach distance for the following: • Scaffolding: Within 8 metres of overhead line equipment • Plant: Within 4 metres of overhead line equipment • People: Within 2 metres of overhead line equipment.
EMU — Electric Multiple Unit. A multi-carriage passenger car set which is electrically powered.
ELECTRIC SERVICE — An electrically powered motive power unit.
ELECTRIC SERVICES LIMITS BOARD — A board which defines the operating limit for an electrically powered motive power unit.
ETP — Electronic Train Protection. A train stop protection system designed to reduce the consequence of a signal passed at danger.
EMERGENCY — An unplanned event requiring urgent action. The event might involve death or serious injury, health or safety effects, significant damage to property or infrastructure.
EMERGENCY BRAKE APPLICATION — Maximum air brake application made when a rail vehicle must be stopped in the minimum distance possible using only the air brake system: • initiated by the Operator / Train Crew, or • by a rail vehicles emergency brake system, or • a fault in the brake system such as rupture to the brake pipe, air hoses becoming disconnected.
ECP — Emergency Call Point. Communication device located at some platforms which initiates a duress call when activated by a pushbutton.
EMERGENCY PROTECTION — A method of using either, or a combination of: signal blocking, TWACS blocking, detonator signals and danger stop signals to prevent rail vehicles from entering an obstructed section, or if already within the obstructed section, from colliding with the obstruction.
EMERGENCY SERVICES — Organisations that respond to and deal with emergencies when they occur, especially the ambulance service, the police, and the fire brigade.
EMERGENCY WORK — Any activity required to urgently restore property or infrastructure following an emergency or incident.
END OF TRAIN MARKER — A red reflectionised disc or target attached to the rear of a train to indicate to rail personnel that the train is complete.
END OF TRAIN SIGNAL — A Train End Monitor (TEM), taillight or end of train marker attached to the rear of a train to indicate to rail personnel that the train is complete.
E-PROTECT — A system on locomotives that uses GPS technology to monitor the speed of trains approaching Compulsory Stop boards, and will penalty brake the train if it does not stop at the Compulsory Stop board.
ETCS — European Train Control System. A signalling, control and train protection system using trackside and onboard components to relay information about a permitted movement authority i.e., speed, distance, and signal/track status ahead.
FACING POINTS — Points with the switch blades facing approaching trains.
FAULT — A defect in a system, product or other change which may cause an error.
FEATURE — An item of railway infrastructure used to: • determine the limits to which a rail movement will set back to, or • to positively identify a railway location, and may include: • level crossings • points • signals • meterage pegs • boards • tunnel portals • traction poles • station platforms • bridges.
FRONZ — Federation of Rail Organisations of New Zealand. An organisation which represents the interests of the Heritage and Tourist Rail Industry in New Zealand.
FENZ — Fire and Emergency New Zealand. A combined urban and rural fire and emergency services organisation with a mandate to provide a wide range of services for communities.
FIRST RESPONDER — The Access Provider’s or Rail Operating Company’s representative on site at a rail incident until a Rail Incident Controller (RIC) arrives.
FISHPLATE — A flat piece of metal used to connect adjacent rails in a railway track.
FIXED SIGNAL — Colour-light signals classified according to use, are as shown in the Network Signals, Indicators and Boards Manual.
FIXED WORK SITE — A static work site within a Protected Work Area.
FLAG — A fabric coloured red or green used during daylight hours as a signal to train crew when there are not fixed signals for the indication.
FLANGE — Projecting edge or rim on the inside circumference of the steel rail wheels and is designed to keep the wheel on a rail.
FLB — Flashing Lights and Bells. Warning devices for road vehicles at railway level crossings.
FLAT (WHEEL) — An area of uneven wear on a rail wheel, typically caused by skidding of that wheel. Significant material build up immediately behind the skidded area is also common.
FLEET NUMBER — A unique letter and digit combination supplied by the Access Provider that forms the registration number of the vehicle registered to operate on the Controlled Network.
FOULING POINT — The point whereby a vehicle standing on one converging line would come into contact with a vehicle on the other line.
FOUL TIME — A method of using time and distance to create a time and distance buffer to allow occupancy of the track.
FRESH AIR DAMPER — A valve that prevents flow of external air into the passenger saloon. Used for tunnels, trackside smoke, or low outside temperature.
FROG — A v-shaped section of rail where another rail joins.
FULFIL — To complete the instructions, and associated activities for an authority.
GANGER — A Track Maintenance Representative who is responsible for leading, supervising, and efficient operation of a workgroup, to achieve track maintenance, repair and renewal work.
GAS MONITOR — Devices used in tunnels to monitor gas levels on non-electric trains and during infrastructure activities.
GAUGE — The distance between the rails on the railway track.
GRADIENT — A measure of the rate at which the railway is inclined (rising or falling).
GRADUATED RELEASE — Air brake system where the brake pressure is applied and released such that the magnitude of braking force is proportional to reduction in brake pipe pressure.
GUARD — Historical reference for a person who is designated a Guard on Heritage trains who is responsible for the welfare and comfort of passengers, assists with emergency working on a passenger train and is in charge of any Ticket Collectors on the train.
TRAIN MANAGER — See also Train Manager.
HAB — Half Arm Barrier. A boom that when lowered blocks vehicular access to the railway corridor at a level crossing.
HAND BRAKE — A manually operated mechanical device used to secure a rail vehicle against movement.
PARK BRAKE — See also Park Brake.
HANDOVER — The transference of information, duties and responsibilities from the person being relieved to the person relieving them.
HAND POINTS — Points not interlocked and worked manually by an independent lever adjacent to the points.
HAND POINTS BOARD — Boards provided at Warrant Stations and sidings, where the main line points are hand points.
HAND SIGNAL — A signal given by hand movements, with or without a flag or light.
HAND SIGNALLER — Rail Personnel who are appointed to hand signal trains in place of fixed signals.
HAND TOOL — Any non-power operated and non-noise emitting tool which may be carried by a single person without the use of a trolley, and which will not interfere with the safe running of trains.
HĀPAI TE MAHI — A software application tool which assists in managing Rail Personnel competencies and access to Protected Work Areas in lieu of: - a TS90 Worksite Register - personal issue padlocks. Rail Personnel instead use personal issue identification cards containing: - photo identification - unique QR code - current competencies.
HAZARD — A source or a situation with a potential to harm someone (injury or illness) or damage property or the environment.
HEAD END DISPLAY UNIT — A visual display unit which displays information transmitted from the Train End Monitor. Information includes: - brake pipe pressure - last vehicle movement - battery condition - tail-light on or off.
HEADLIGHT — White light fitted on the leading end of an MPU to provide visibility for the train crew and to improve the visibility of trains.
HEAT SEASON — Normally runs from Summer Daylight Saving through to the return to NZ Standard Time to manage the adverse effects of heat on the track by use of Temporary Speed Restrictions applied when heat thresholds are exceeded on track, which has been identified as at-risk of buckling.
HEAVY TRACK EQUIPMENT — Infrastructure items of equipment which under normal conditions cannot be removed from the track manually by two rail personnel.
HERITAGE OPERATOR — An Operator with access rights granted in accordance with the Common Access Terms to the NRS pursuant to a Heritage Access Agreement operating trains which include Heritage Vehicles.
HERITAGE PARTICIPANT — A Heritage Operator or a Heritage Vehicle Provider.
HERITAGE TRAIN — A train operated principally for the enjoyment of the journey, or the equipment used and hauled by a locomotive that is a Heritage Vehicle, or consists principally of Heritage Vehicles, and that does not run to a regular scheduled timetable.
HERITAGE VEHICLE — A vehicle that meets the requirements of APIS 11 - Heritage Vehicle and Train Management.
HIGH COLUMN SWITCH STAND — Are provided at main line to loop and loop to siding points as shown on an S & I Diagram. These switch stands incorporate coloured target indicators and a points operating mechanism.
HI-VIZ — High-Visibility Clothing. Approved mandatory clothing to be worn on the rail network as defined by the Access Provider.
PPE — See also Personal Protective Equipment.
HRV — Hi-Rail Vehicle. A road vehicle or plant fitted with retractable flanged rail wheels, and can be driven on the road or rail.
HORN — An audible device used to sound a warning.
HOURS OF DARKNESS — A period between sunset on one day and before sunrise on the next day, or any other time when there is insufficient daylight to render clearly visible a person or object at 100 metres.
IMPERFECTLY DISPLAYED SIGNAL — A signal displaying any aspect not described in the rules or a signal not showing an authorised aspect.
INCIDENT — An unplanned event that poses a threat to personnel, customers, community, environment, property or disruption to operations.
INCIDENT CONTROLLER — A FENZ, Police, Ambulance or Civil Defence person appointed, or performing, the duties of Incident Controller (Emergency Services) at the site of an occurrence.
ICP — Incident Control Point. Dedicated facilities and other emergency provisioning located at select tunnel portals.
ITD — Individual Train Detection. A safe working system, but it will not prevent rail vehicles from entering an occupied section of track. It is a safety check process which may enable workers to access specific areas of the rail corridor as individuals, or as a group.
DIB — Information Bulletin. Applies for the day(s) of operation only and includes information on general daily instructions, running of extra trains and maintenance work.
DAILY INFORMATION BULLETIN — Also called Daily Information Bulletin.
IJ — Insulated Joint. Permanently bolted rail joints containing bonded insulation materials wrapped around each contacting surface to electrically isolate them and are used for identifying trains within a track circuit.
INTERLOCKED JUNCTION — A junction between single and multi-lines or a crossover between multi-lines.
INTERLOCKED STATION — A station or portion of a station with automatic signalling provided to prevent conflicting movements.
INTERLOCKING — Points and signalling that are electrically or mechanically arranged so as to prevent conflicting train movements from being operated.
IB — Intermediate Board. A notice board provided between stations or sidings to identify a location which may be used to designate a limit for a track warrant.
INTERMEDIATE BRAKE TEST — The process of ensuring that the brakes at the rear of the train respond correctly when applied and released.
INTERMEDIATE SECTION — Any portion of a block section divided into two or more intermediate sections. Entrance to subsequent intermediate sections is governed by an Intermediate signal.
ISOLATE — Disconnect or remove all possible sources of energy supply.
ISOLATED (TRACTION) — Disconnection of a section of overhead contact line from the source of electrical energy, either in an emergency or to facilitate maintenance.
ISOLATION MODE — When an excavator has been made safe and the isolation bar engaged disabling the excavator from movement in any direction or swing. When other mobile plant, not fitted with an isolation device, is in neutral or park and the handbrake applied.
ISSUE — To give or send copies of authorities, warnings, notices, and publications to affected rail personnel by voice, radio, hand delivery or electronic means.
JSEA — Job Safety and Environment Analysis. A systematic process used to identify potential hazards, evaluate risks, and determine control measures before starting a task.
JOHNSONVILLE LINE — The principal line between Wellington and Johnsonville.
JOP — Joint Operating Plan. Local operating instructions issued jointly by all parties for specifically designated sidings, depots or terminals with rail activity involving more than one party.
JUMPER CABLE — A heavy duty cable used to transfer electrical power and data between coupled motive power units.
KMC — Kupe Mobile Controller. A mobile controller which uses radio and GPS technology to identify locomotive and HRV locations, and is linked to locomotive Tranzlog event recorder systems.
LX — Level Crossing. Any place where: • a railway line crosses a road on the same level, or • the public is permitted to cross a railway line on the same level, and includes a bridge used for both rail vehicles and road traffic on the same level.
PNGL — Palmerston North to Gisborne Line. The principal line between Palmerston North and Gisborne.
PANDROL CLIP — A resilient fastening system used with a bedplate on some timber/composite sleepers and with a cast in housing/pad on concrete sleepers.
PANTOGRAPH — An apparatus mounted on the roof of an electric rail vehicle to transfer power from the contact wire.
PARK BRAKE — Means by which an unattended or unpowered vehicle can be secured against unplanned movement. The retarding force is usually applied either by spring or ratchet handwheel through the brake mechanism to press the brake block/pad to the wheel tread or disc.
PARTING — When the forces of run-in or run-out become excessive, causing a failure of the drawgear and a disconnection between rail vehicles.
PASS — To move alongside and in front of another train travelling in the same direction in single line territory.
PIDS — Passenger Information Display System. The signage onboard passenger services advising the next stop, etc.
PASSENGER OPERATOR — A person designated to assist a Train Manager with: - comfort of passengers - emergency working on a passenger train - ticket collections on the train.
PASSIVE LEVEL CROSSING — A level crossing only protected by signage, pedestrian mazes, chicanes, or bollards.
PEDESTRIAN CROSSING — A crossing at substantially the same level as a rail track that is used by pedestrians to cross the track.
PSR — Permanent Speed Restriction. A permanently imposed reduction of line speed for the specified area of track, that may be for any reason.
PERMISSIBLE SPEED — The maximum speed permitted by the signalling system for the area.
PERMISSIVE SIGNAL — A signal that is normally controlled by the passage of rail traffic and may be passed without the authority of a Train Controller or Signaller as provided for in the Rail Operating Rules.
PERMIT ISSUER — The competent person authorised to issue Site Safety Permits, Permit to Dig or Permit to Enter.
PERMIT TO DIG — The necessary authority required to break ground within the railway corridor.
PERMIT TO ENTER — The necessary authority required for working in, or impacting on KiwiRail rail operational areas, unless working under direct KiwiRail supervision.
PPE — Personal Protective Equipment. Anything used or worn by a person (including clothing) to minimise risks to the person’s health and safety. This may include respiratory protective equipment, hearing protection, eye protection, protective clothing, and safety harness systems.
PIC — Person in Charge. The designated competent worker who is in charge for the time being of a task, safe working procedure, workgroup or incident.
PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR MOVEMENTS — The competent worker who has overall responsibility for the movements of rail vehicles within their jurisdiction.
PHONETIC ALPHABET — A standard word with standard pronunciation representing each letter of the alphabet, used to 'spell' a word to clarify a verbal communication.
PILOT — A competent worker who ensures the safety of a rail vehicle by guiding the Operator.
PILOTING — Ensuring the safety of a movement by providing line of sight and range of vision for the Operator.
PLANNED WORK — Any activity, which may obstruct the line for more than 120 minutes duration and is planned at least one day in advance.
PLATFORM — A flat area alongside a railway track, often raised to be level with carriage doors or the wagon bed providing convenient access to rail vehicles.
PTI — Platform Train Interface. The relationship between the carriage and the station platforms. The width of the gap, and platform height can vary dependant on local conditions.
POINTS — A mechanical installation enabling rail vehicles to be guided from one track to another, such as at a junction or where a siding branches off. also known as turnout.
SWITCHES — Also called Switches.
POINTS OPERATOR — A competent worker authorised to manually operate motor points.
PORTABLE RADIO — A low-wattage handheld radio.
POWER VAN — A rail vehicle (carriage or van) with a diesel-powered generator to provide power source for lighting and heating or cooling power of a passenger train.
PROCEED — The authorised planned direction of the movement.
PROCEED AUTHORITY — An authority that allows rail traffic to enter and occupy a portion of line and proceed in the forward direction.
PROCEED INDICATION — Any signal indication other than stop.
PROPEL — To push rail vehicles with a motive power unit.
PWA — Protected Work Area. Section of line or lines where rail personnel are carrying out activities using an approved protection method. Fixed and/or mobile work sites will operate under the direction of a Rail Protection Officer in a Protected Work Area.
PROTECTION — The means used to prevent rail vehicles from entering a worksite or other portion of track, or to prevent road or pedestrian traffic entering a level crossing.
PROTECTION METHOD — Specific systems authorised for use to provide protection to rail personnel and rail vehicles: • Track Warrant • Track and Time Permit (Mis.60) • Compulsory Stop Protection • Lockout Zones • Blocking • Emergency Protection • Work within Non interlocked Area • Foul Time.
PROTECTION PLANNER — A role which reviews requests for track occupations to ensure that the optimum and least disruptive protection method is applied. The person performing this role may possess a different job title than Protection Planner.
PROVINCIAL PASSENGER SERVICE — A long-distance rail passenger service that extends beyond a city's metro area.
RADIO — Primary method of communication with Train Control, used for shunting and communication with Train Crew.
RADIO LINK — A two-way communication link or system using radio.
RAILCAR — Self-propelled vehicle designed to carry passengers.
RAIL CORRIDOR — See Railway Corridor.
RAIL DEFECT — A surface or internal fault in the rail which may affect the serviceable life of the rail.
RAIL FOOT — Area of the rail which comes into contact with the bedplate transferring the weight of rail vehicles through to the track sleeper.
RAIL HEAD — Area where the rail and wheel interface occurs.
RIC — Rail Incident Controller. A competent person appointed, or performing, as designated by the Access Provider / Operator the duties of the Rail Incident Controller at the site of an incident. Rail Incident Controllers are in charge of all rail personnel on site as per NRSS / 5.
RAIL MODE — When mobile plant has its retractable steel wheels placed on the railway tracks and can move in either direction.
RAIL NETWORK — A combination of track and other infrastructure controlled by KiwiRail.
ROC — Rail Operating Code. A Rail Operating Company's document incorporating operating instructions associated with the operation of their trains and terminals on the National Rail System.
NOTE — Each Rail Operating Company may issue their own Rail Operating Code, and where necessary the RORP may mandate certain sections or clauses for designated Rail Personnel working on the National Rail System — refer to NRSS/7.
RORP — Rail Operating Rules and Procedures. Documents incorporating operating rules, procedures, and instructions applicable for all Rail Personnel operating trains and carrying out maintenance activity on the National Rail System.
RORF — Rail Operating Rules Framework. KiwiRail's Rail Operating Rules, Procedures, Codes, Manuals, Local Network Instructions and associated documents.
RAIL OPERATIONS CENTRE — Operational facilities in Wellington and Auckland centred around Train Control and may include key stakeholders such as Metro Service Operators and council transport representatives. These centres are known as the Wellington Rail Operations Centre (WROC) and Auckland Rail Operations Centre (AROC).
RAIL OPERATOR (JOB TITLE) — A qualified person who assists the Locomotive Engineer/Remote Control Operator with the movement and general working of the train.
RAIL PARTICIPANT — Any organisation or person responsible for the provision or maintenance of rail services.
RAIL PERSONNEL — Employees, agents, contractors, or voluntary individuals engaged for the purposes of carrying out rail activities.
RPO — Rail Protection Officer. The person with overall responsibility for providing rail protection for the protected work area.
RAIL PROTECTION PERSONNEL — Rail Protection Officers, Assistant Rail Protection Officers and Site Protectors who have the authority to provide rail protection for the Protected Work Area.
RSO — Rail Safety Observer. A person reporting to the Site Protector, responsible for observing a single activity. For example, ensuring an activity working behind authorised fencing does not obstruct the running line.
RAIL SAFETY WORK (RSW) — • driving or moving rail vehicles, including by remote control in all situations • operating infrastructure vehicles and plant when on track • piloting rail vehicles • riding rail vehicles in authorised positions • obstructing the track when on the ground without protection • obstructing the track in a protected work area that includes moving rail vehicles • undertaking train crew duties e.g., Second Person or Minder Driver duties.
RAIL TUNNEL — An excavation or a construction around the track provided to allow the railway to pass under or through an obstruction. The length of a tunnel is defined as the length of the fully enclosed section, measured at rail level. A tunnel in this context is 0.1km or longer which requires safety mitigations in place due to the risks associated with safe operations.
RAILWAY — The railway infrastructure, rail vehicles, and other property (other than railway premises), including property specified by regulations made under section 59(j) and vehicles prescribed under section 59(k), that together are being used for the purpose of transporting people or goods by rail; but excludes— a. a railway used as an amusement device, b. a railway that operates on a set of rails with a gauge of less than 550 mm between them, unless that set of rails is designated as a railway line under section 59(l), and c. a railway that operates on a railway line excluded by regulations made under section 59(m).
RAILWAY CORRIDOR — The land between the legal boundaries of railway land, or land within five (5) metres of the centreline of any operational track in cases where the land boundary is less than this distance.
RAILWAY INFRASTRUCTURE — Railway infrastructure means: - railway lines - train control and signal equipment & systems - communications equipment - electrical traction equipment - any other property specified as railway infrastructure in regulations, e.g., rail bridges, culverts, and tunnels.
RAIL WEB — The upright part of the rail linking the rail head to the rail foot.
RAISE THE ALARM — To make people understand the danger of something.
RAKE — A number of vehicles connected together (may be part of a train).
RANGE OF VISION — Occupying a position which provides an unobstructed view of the intended route.
RECEIVER — The person who receives a voice transmission via radio or telephone communications.
RMO — Registered Medical Officer. A medical doctor who has been selected by KiwiRail, on the basis of their compliance with the specified selection criteria, to perform rail safety worker health assessments.
REGULATIONS — Mandatory requirements authorised under the relevant legislation.
REGULATOR (LEGISLATIVE) — Government body which regulates and monitors land transport system users.
REGULATOR (RAIL VEHICLE) — A track machine used to ensure an even distribution of ballast.
RELAY MOVEMENT — Moving a train between a storage yard and a platform.
RELEASE CODE — A randomly generated 4-digit code which is required to remove tagged: - signals - points - track circuits - switch lock sidings - block directions.
RELEASE CODE BLOCKING AREA — An area where release codes are used for signal blocking.
REMINDER FUNCTION — A Train Control system function that enables the Signaller / Train Controller to insert comments on signals, points, and switch locks that must be read and acknowledged before enabling operation of the command.
RCO — Remote Control Operator. A competent worker authorised to remotely control a motive power unit.
RPE — Respiratory Protection Equipment. Includes: • masks and filters • Self Contained Self Rescuers (SCSR) • Compressed Air Breathing Apparatus (CABA).
RESTRICTED SPEED — Proceed cautiously, being able to stop short of an obstruction within half the distance of clear line that is visible ahead. Not to exceed 40 km/h.
REVERSE (POINTS) — The opposite to Normal. The points are set to guide the rail vehicle through the less preferred route of those points. The points are in Reverse when the “N →” attached to the sleeper at the point of switching, is pointing towards the open blade.
RIGHT OF WAY — The authority required for passenger trains to depart a platform.
RIGHT-SIDE FAILURE — A signalling failure that does not reduce the protection given by signalling equipment.
RISK ASSESSMENT — A systematic process of identifying hazards and evaluating any associated risks within a workplace, then implementing reasonable control measures to remove or reduce them.
ROAD — A designated rail track within the terminal area or shunting yard.
ROAD KNOWLEDGE — An Operator’s familiarity with a defined section of track and facilities on the National Rail System.
ROAD MODE — When mobile plant is powered under its own tracks, rubber wheels, or other mechanical system other than retractable steel wheels.
ROLLING STOCK — All locomotives, motive power units, wagons, and carriages.
ROLLING STOCK REPRESENTATIVE — A competent worker authorised to carry out tasks on rail vehicles.
ROUTE — The path from one limit of authority to the next in the direction of travel.
RRE — Roving Response Engineer. Certified Rolling Stock Representatives authorised to assist Greater Wellington Regional Council operated rail vehicles with in-service technical issues and mechanical issues, and repairs.
RUN-IN — When a rear section of a train is travelling faster than a forward section of a train. Run-in may be a combination of coupling slack and draftgear slack, dependent upon the forces generated.
RUNNER — A vehicle used when marshalling restrictions as identified in the rules, codes or instructions designate the separation of some vehicles from others. For example, Dangerous Goods, light loading, overhanging loads, locomotives.
RUNNING LINE — A line which can be used for through movements of rail traffic.
RUNNING ROAD — See Running Line.
RUN-OUT — When a rear section of a train is travelling slower than a forward section of a train. Run-out may also be a combination of coupling slack and draftgear slack dependent upon the forces generated.
RUN THROUGH — When a rail movement passes through a trailing set of points that are not set in the correct position for the movement.
SAFE AREA — Any area beyond 4 metres horizontally from the centre of the nearest railway line. The general area beyond the Danger Area. Not to be used in lieu of a Safe Place used for Protected Work Areas which has more prescriptive requirements.
SAFE BRAKING DISTANCE — A distance indicated to train crew that would allow trains to stop with the application of normal service braking.
SAFE DISTANCE (TRACTION) — An area beyond the Minimum Approach Distance for the type of work being undertaken.
SAFE MODE — Status of plant where the Operator is out of the cab, with the machine's buckets / booms down, clear of any adjacent running line.
SAFE PLACE — A place where people and equipment cannot be struck by passing rail traffic, which may be: • at a designated location that is at least 2.5 metres from the centre of the nearest running line • within an approved refuge • behind a permanent safety line on a designated walkway • behind a permanent structure or permanent physical barrier which protects from moving trains, or • behind authorised fencing in accordance with T$14 Authorised Fencing.
SAFETY ALERT — Safety alerts are issued when there is a specific safety issue that without immediate action being taken could result in a serious or fatal injury.
SAFETY BARRIER SYSTEM — The erection of Authorised Fencing to create a physical structure between rail personnel and a running line.
SAFETY BRIEFING — A notice or email issued that includes safety information that is to be immediately made available to the addressees on the document.
SAFETY BUFFER (FOUL TIME) — The designated amount of time between the Clear Time and the anticipated arrival time of the next train to the occupied area.
SAFETY BUFFER ZONE — The unprotected area between the Compulsory Stop Board and the Work Begins board which provides an overrun buffer should a rail movement fail to stop before the Compulsory Stop Board.
SAFETY CASE — A written demonstration that an organisation has the ability and means to manage all of its activities safely.
SAFETY CONTROLS — Control measures implemented to eliminate or minimise risks to health and safety: • Elimination • Substitution • Isolation • Engineering control measures • Administrative controls • Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
SAFETY CRITICAL — Directly influencing safety (when applied to equipment or systems).
SAFETY INTERFACE — An instance in which two individual parties using the same workspace, share and hold responsibility and accountability for the control of risks to the health and safety of personnel, visitors and other people.
SLO — Safety Liaison Officer. The Rail Licence holder has a safety liaison officer who is authorised to act as the licence holder primary contact with the authority (Land Transport NZ) in relation to the Licence.
SAFETY OBSERVATION — In-field assessment of rail personnel carrying out the application of practical skills for the activities specified on their License to Operate.
SAFETY POINTS — Placed on crossing loops and sidings as required to prevent vehicles entering on or fouling the main line. Safety points are also placed on the main line where shown on Signalling and Interlocking diagrams (S & I).
SAFETY SYSTEM — In relation to a rail participant, means a written record of all the rail participant’s management and operational policies and practices that relate to the safe conduct of its rail activities; and includes the rail participant’s operational and training manuals.
SAFE WORKING — Ensuring that personnel and visitors to the workplace are not exposed to avoidable risks, hazards, and potential incidents.
SWA — Safe Working Authority. A form used to authorise rail traffic movements not otherwise permitted under the normal system of safe working.
SCENIC TRAIN — A long-distance non-commuter rail service aimed at the tourism market.
SCHEDULED — As specified in the master train plan, schedule notice or bulletins.
SECONDARY PROTECTION — An additional protection method, used in Multi Work Sites PWAs.
SECOND PERSON — Rail personnel with the operational knowledge required to travel in a Motive Power Unit, to assist with Motive Power Unit and train duties and provide assistance to the Operator during breakdown procedures.
SECURE — To place and keep something in a known or prepared place or position to safeguard it against accidental or unauthorised access or movement.
SEICALL — Radio tones automatically transmitted by radios used within the controlled network to allow the Train Controller to identify the user.
SCSR — Self-Contained Self-Rescuer. A portable piece of equipment that supplies breathable air when the surrounding atmosphere lacks oxygen or is contaminated with toxic gases.
SENDER — The person who sends a voice transmission via radio or telephone communications.
SERIAL BRAKING — A method of slowing used by trains braking on grades by a series of brake applications and releases. As each brake application is made, the speed is reduced, after which the brakes are released and the train is recharged.
SERVICE BRAKE — Operator initiated brake application for EMU vehicles using either, or both regenerative and friction braking systems when a rail vehicle must be stopped in the minimum distance possible.
SERVICE MANAGER — A rail participant's manager responsible for operational decision making.
SET BACK — To move in the reverse direction to that provided in the current proceed authority.
SEVERE WEATHER — Weather conditions which may cause line damage, or cause objects to obstruct the line.
SEVERE WEATHER WARNING (LEVEL 1) — Advisory information for train crews and infrastructure personnel to be alert for conditions that may damage the line such as falling trees and flooding, and to report any such risks immediately to the Train Controller e.g., • above average rain fall, or high winds • rivers flowing from catchment areas with heavy rainfall • sustained periods of poor weather.
SHUNTER — Historical term for Rail Personnel certified and competent to undertake shunting. See also Rail Operator.
SHUNTER'S PLATFORM — A platform attached to the front and rear of shunt locomotives. This is a no Ride Position. See also Cow Catcher.
SHUNTING — To move a rail vehicle into a different location / track using a MPU for this purpose.
SHUNTING LEG — A line with several roads leading from it used for shunting movements during the break-up and marshalling of trains.
SHUNTING PERSONNEL — Rail personnel who engage in the process of shunting rail vehicles.
SIDING — A line other than main lines and crossing loops. May be used for marshalling, stabling, loading and unloading, or servicing of rail vehicles.
SIDING CONTROLLER — A person responsible for the co-ordination of rail vehicle movements in a designated siding outside of the Controlled Network.
SIGHTING DISTANCE — The distance that someone can clearly see along a track unobstructed.
SIGNAL — A visual display device which conveys instructions, or provides warning of instructions regarding the Operator's authority to proceed.
SIGNAL BLOCKING — A means to prevent clearance of a signal and/or movement of points when it is desired to inhibit entry of a rail vehicle movement into a section of track, or when required to prevent operation of signals or points.
SIGNAL BOX — Any place where a Signaller operates signal levers to control signals and points at a station.
SIGNAL CALL — A verbal identification of displayed signals or indicator aspects, called by, or between the crew of a rail vehicle.
SIGNAL CALLING — The procedure of verbally calling out the meaning of aspects displayed by automatic running signals and indicators.
SIGNAL HEAD — The part of a colour light signal from which the aspects are displayed.
SIGNAL LENS — Coloured transparent glass or plastic built into signal heads to enable multi aspect signal displays.
SIGNALLER — The person who directly controls signals at an Interlocked Station, who may also be the Train Controller.
S & I DIAGRAM — Signalling and Interlocking Diagram.
SPAD — Signal Passed at Danger.
SMR — Signals Maintenance Representative. A competent worker authorised to carry out tasks on signalling and telecommunications equipment.
SIGNALS MANAGER — The person authorised to manage signals, telecommunications, electrical matters (and traction where installed) for a specified area.
SIGNAL TRIP — A train protection device that automatically stops a train if it attempts to pass a signal when the signal aspect and operating rules prohibit such movement.
SINGLE CREWING — Operator only operation of trains.
SINGLE LINE — Where a main line between two stations is for use by both Up and Down trains.
SITE INDUCTION — A way to introduce workers and visitors to relevant site-specific information and resources they need to keep themselves and other workers safe and healthy while at work.
SP — Site Protector. The Site Protector is responsible for all personnel and equipment within work site and reports to the RPO.
SSP — Site Safety Permit. A form which once completed, authorises personnel to visit, or work in a non-interlocked rail operator's area, subject to the hazards and controls specified on the permit.
SLEEPER — A rectangular shaped tie laid perpendicular to the rails which keeps the rails correctly spaced apart and transfers the load it receives from the rail in to the ballast.
SPAD 'A' — A category "A" SPAD is a SPAD where a stop signal indication (and any associated preceding cautionary indications) was displayed correctly, in sufficient time for the train to be stopped safely at the signal. NOTE A stop signal also includes points indicators, notice boards (those requiring a train to stop), and Track Warrant limit over-runs.
SPECIAL BULLETIN — Written authority for one-off rule modifications, or provides for special or unusual circumstances not otherwise contained within the Rail Operating Rules or Operating Code. Usually for a period of less than 5 days.
SPEED INDICATOR — Fitted above the top signal unit on a signal mast. When illuminated, will display a steady white speed in km/h that any train passing that signal must not exceed until the next signal in advance is reached unless ETCS indicates a higher speed.
SPEED RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS — Information provided to train crews for each train journey advising temporary speed restrictions and trackside conditions that train crews need to be aware of.
SPIKE (POINTS) — A method of driving a stake into the ground to hold a set of points in place to prevent movement.
SPLIT REDUCTION — The process of making an initial brake pipe reduction to a lesser degree than the fully required reduction, followed by further reductions until the total reduction required is reached.
SPREADER BAR — The bar between switch blades at a set of points.
STABILISED APPROACH — A method of using checkpoints to prompt the Operator to initiate a series of stepped speed reductions in order to stop their train short of the required location.
STABLE — To leave rail vehicles unattended and secured, usually in a siding.
SLG — Standard Loading Gauge. The maximum permitted dimensions of the rail vehicle and load.
STATION ENTRY BOARD — Provided in multi-line areas where a signal is not available and defines a boundary for entry into an Interlocked Station.
STATION LIMITS — Includes all lines within the outer most signals, station entry boards or points on each line controlled by the Signaller for the station. NOTE Where fixed signals are not provided, station limits include all lines within the first facing points or Points Indicator met approaching the station on the main line from either direction or as otherwise defined on S&I diagrams.
STATION WARNING BOARD — A notice board, provided in the absence of an intermediate or distant signal, to warn of the approach to station limits at a Warrant Station or the end of TWC territory.
STOP (ACTION) — Bring all movements to a stop.
STOP (SIGNAL INDICATION) — Any signal capable of showing a danger aspect.
STOP BLOCK — A structure fixed at the termination of a running line or siding to arrest slow-moving vehicles.
STOP BOARD — A safe working notice board inscribed 'stop' and/or displaying a red coloured symbol, at which all trains must stop and must not pass until authorised.
STROP — A restraining device used to secure the load on a wagon.
STTE MANAGER — The person authorised to manage signals, telecommunications, electrical (and traction where installed) for the region.
SUBSTANTIAL BARRIER — A significant physical obstacle that prevents or restricts progress, movement, or access, such as a fence, wall or Safety Barrier System.
SWITCH BLADE — The movable part of the turnout permanently connected to the stock rail at the heel of the switch, typically a pair of linked profiled rails that can be moved laterally to allow a rail vehicle to pass from one line to the other. Also called Points Blade.
SWITCH IN / SWITCH OUT SIGNAL BOX — A Signal Box containing an interlocking machine or panel which can be switched 'in' for local control or switched 'out' when unattended and operated remotely.
SWITCH IN / SWITCH OUT STATION — An interlocked station where signals can be set to clear automatically without a Signaller in attendance.
SWITCH LOCK SIDING — A siding within an Interlocked Station or Block Section fitted with points that can only be reversed for the siding after an electric lock has been released.
TAILLIGHT — A red light, which may flash, attached to the rear of a train to indicate to rail personnel that the train is complete.
TAMPER — Mechanised rail vehicle which lifts and straightens track.
TSR — Temporary Speed Restriction. An imposed reduction of the normal speed for track.
TERMINAL — A manned station, marshalling yard or Container Transfer Site from which trains originate or terminate at.
TERMINAL BRAKE TEST — The process of checking each vehicle on the train to ensure that the braking system is correctly connected and operative, both in application and release, on each vehicle. On locomotives this includes air brake and vigilance configuration.
THEORY ASSESSMENT — Assessment of employees to test their theoretical knowledge for the activities specified on their License to Operate.
TOOLBOX BRIEFING — A pre-shift forum for onsite work planning, prior to work commencing.
TOTAL — The length of a train for crossings and other purposes and is shown in metres.
TRACK — Includes: - rails - sleepers and associated formation and ballast - tunnels - bridges - any associated electric traction, communication, signalling and other equipment.
TRACK AND TIME PERMIT (MIS.60) — A numbered authority issued by the Train Controller to occupy a defined area of track for a specific period of time.
TRACK CIRCUIT — An electric circuit where current is carried through the rails and used to detect the presence of trains.
TRACK DATA PLATES — Punched aluminium data plates mounted on all traction poles in the NIMT, Auckland, and Wellington electrified areas and are also used as trackside monuments where required, such as platforms or managed track areas.
TRACK DEFECT — Fault in the track which has the potential to cause a derailment unless a speed restriction is imposed.
TMR — Track Maintenance Representative. A competent worker authorised to carry out tasks on the railway track and supporting infrastructure.
TRACK MISALIGNMENT — Distortion of track alignment under adverse conditions.
TRACK SAFETY QUALIFICATION — A Licence to Operate for the relevant duties being performed and the subsequent protection method required to perform those duties.
TRACK SECTION — The track where the limits are identified by location marker signs or fixed signals.
TRACK SHORTING DEVICE — A device that can be applied to the rails to activate track circuits. Includes track shorting cables.
TRACK VEHICLE — A vehicle, usually self-propelled, used for inspecting and/or maintaining infrastructure.
TRACK VEHICLE OPERATOR — A competent worker duly authorised to operate a Track Vehicle.
TRACK WARRANT — An authority issued by the Train Controller defining limits and other instructions for the occupation of the main line.
TWACS — Track Warrant Computer System. System that allows a Train Controller to generate and verify a computerised version of the Mis.87 Track Warrant.
TWC — Track Warrant Control. An operating system where the occupation of the main line is controlled by verbal instructions given by the Train Controller.
TRACK WORK — Construction, maintenance, or repair work on infrastructure in the Railway Corridor.
TRACK WORKER — Competent worker whose primary duties are associated with work on or around infrastructure in the railway corridor.
TRACTION — The transmission of electrical energy from a power source, usually Overhead Line Equipment, to power an electric motive power unit.
TRACTION COMPETENT PERSON — A person is one who is registered with EWRB and holds a current Electrical Practicing Licence from EWRB and has satisfied the TEETC (Or delegated authority) that they can safely perform the required electrical work, through the successful completion of a period of OJT and other training requirements.
TRACTION CONTROL REPRESENTATIVE — A competent worker authorised to carry out switching of remotely controlled switches and advises the Traction Competent Person of isolation actions carried out.
TRACTION MOTOR — An electric motor used for propulsion of a rail vehicle, such as a locomotives or electric multiple unit trains.
TRACTION POWER RETURN — A system which uses the running rails as an electrical conductor to return the traction power to the substation from which it originated.
TRAILING HAND BRAKE — Brake handle at the rear of a moving vehicle in the direction of travel.
TRAILING POINTS — Those switches over which trains from two lines converge onto one line and the points of the switch blades are facing away from approaching trains.
TRAIN — One or more rail vehicles coupled together, at least one of which is a locomotive or other self-propelled unit that is designed to be operated on a railway.
TC — Train Control. The Access Provider's operating centre(s) where Train Controllers operate.
TRAIN CONTROLLER — The person who controls the movement of all trains and authorisation of maintenance occupancies within a specific area on the Controlled Network.
TRAIN CREW — The Locomotive Engineer or Operator, Rail Operator, Train Manager, Passenger Operator, and other Rail Personnel provided to assist with running of the train under the direction of the Locomotive Engineer or Operator.
TEM — Train End Monitor. An electronic device which monitors brake pipe pressure, last vehicle movement and whether the taillight is on or off. A built-in radio transmits this information to the locomotive for processing and display on the head end display unit.
TRAIN EQUIPMENT — Components which form part of, or are attached to, rail vehicles for the purpose of running a train.
TX — Train Examination. Examinations of the condition of rolling stock, including air brake operation to ensure operating conditions are safe and sufficient.
TRAIN LIGHTS — The lights displayed by a motive power unit, comprising primarily of headlights, ditch lights and taillights.
TRAIN MANAGER — A person designated as Train Manager who is responsible for the welfare and comfort of passengers, assists with emergency working on a passenger train and is in charge of any Ticket Collectors on the train.
TPWS — Train Protection and Warning System. A system by which a train is stopped by an automatic application of the brakes when activated by lineside equipment.
TRANS HIP — Transfer from one vehicle to another.
TRAP POINTS — Single blade derailing switches provided for the protection of the main line, crossing loop, or other places as shown on S&I diagrams.
TREADLE — A mechanical or electrical device that detects that a rail vehicle wheel has passed a particular location.
TRESPASSER — A person unlawfully on railway property (i.e., without proper authorisation).
TARP — Triggered Action Response Plan. A prescribed set of step procedures for known workplace hazards.
TROLLEY — A trolley which can readily be removed from the line by no more than two persons and is used for the conveyance of personnel and tools.
T/O — Turnout. A mechanical installation enabling trains to be guided from one track to another, such as at a junction or where a siding branches off. also known as points.
TWACS BLOCKING — A method of tagging portions of the track warrant control area as not usable to prevent a track warrant from being issued.
TEU — Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit. The standard unit of measurement in global container shipping.
UHF — Ultra High Frequency. UHF band radios are used for: • ASP Shunting (Audio Shunting Procedures) in rail yards, • on the Interislander Ferries, and • when Operators are away from their cabs, to communicate with onboard staff.
UNAUTHORISED — Not given approval or exceeding the limit of authority.
UNCOUPLE — To separate rail vehicles.
UNIT TRAIN — Any train which operates in a fixed consist between loading and unloading points, usually carrying bulk commodities such as coal, forestry, or grain.
UNPLANNED WORK — Any activity, which may obstruct the line for less than 120 minutes duration and is not planned at least one day in advance.
UP DIRECTION — Trains running towards Otiria in the North Island and towards Picton in the South Island are travelling in the up direction.
VHF — Very High Frequency. E Band is a range of channels allocated exclusively for railway use. These give point to point communication between radios on the same channel over a distance of typically five (5) kilometres.
VESTIBULE — The flexible link that allows access between carriages.
VD — Vigilance Device. In-cab device to monitor the alertness of the Operator through a multi-resetting system which gets reset by specified normal operational activities of the crew, in addition to the acknowledgement of the push button provided for Train Crew.
VDU — Visual Display Unit. A piece of equipment with a screen on which information from a computer can be shown.
WAGON — A rail vehicle designed to carry freight or railway equipment and materials.
WALKING PACE — A speed not exceeding 5 km/h.
WARNING SIGN — A sign placed on a rail vehicle on which maintenance is being undertaken.
WARRANT STATION — A non-interlocked station in Track Warrant Control areas provided for the crossing of trains, or the junction of two main lines.
WEARABLE TECHNOLOGY — Any electronic device designed to be worn on the user’s body, including, but not limited to: - smart watches - fitness trackers - Bluetooth headsets - Bluetooth audio sunglasses.
WELD — Two sections of rail joined together by either Thermit or Flash Butt Welding.
WEA — Wellington Electrified Area. All electrified lines between Wellington, Upper Hutt and Waikanae.
WELLINGTON METRO AREA — All lines between Wellington and: - Johnsonville - Waikanae - Melling - Masterton.
WHEEL BURN — Heat induced damage on the rail head often caused by wheel slip and the resulting loss of friction between the wheel and rail.
WHEEL LATHE — A machine used to reprofile worn or compromised wheels of railway rolling stock.
WHISTLE — Audible warning device employed on steam locomotives.
HORN — See also Horn.
WORK AREA — A work area consisting of single or multiple worksites under the control of a Rail Protection Officer/Site Protector.
WORK BETWEEN — When specified on a written authority, movements are permitted to work in either direction between the locations specified.
WORK ON TRACK — Construction, maintenance, or repair work on infrastructure in the Rail Corridor.
TRACK WORK — See also Track Work.
WORKSITE — An area with defined limits that is protected so that work can be performed.
WETA — Worksite Entry Train Alert. A system which alerts rail personnel to approaching rail vehicles through flashing lights, sirens, and radio broadcast messages.
WORK SUPERVISOR — The person responsible for managing the activities within a worksite including the occupational health and safety of personnel.
WT — Work Train. A train used for maintenance purposes (generally infrastructure maintenance such as ballasting and rail renewals) which are not in revenue service.
WLR — Wrong Line Running. Train movements running in the opposite direction in a block section where the automatic signalling system is designed to allow train movements in one direction only.
WRONG-SIDE FAILURE — A failure resulting in a significantly less safe condition than previously existed or the failure of the signalling or safety system to provide the protection intended.
YARD — Area comprised of multiple tracks used for the storage and marshalling of rail vehicles.
YOKE — Railway vehicle component which forms part of the drawgear.